CEAS Aeronautical Journal (2020) 11:713–730
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13272-020-00449-8

ORIGINAL PAPER

Mass, primary energy, and cost: the impact of optimization objectives
on the initial sizing of hybrid‑electric general aviation aircraft
D. Felix Finger1,2 · Falk Götten1,2 · Carsten Braun1 · Cees Bil2
Received: 19 December 2019 / Revised: 30 March 2020 / Accepted: 2 April 2020 / Published online: 22 April 2020
© The Author(s) 2020

Abstract
For short take-off and landing (STOL) aircraft, a parallel hybrid-electric propulsion system potentially offers superior performance compared to a conventional propulsion system, because the short-take-off power requirement is much higher than the
cruise power requirement. This power-matching problem can be solved with a balanced hybrid propulsion system. However,
there is a trade-off between wing loading, power loading, the level of hybridization, as well as range and take-off distance. An
optimization method can vary design variables in such a way that a minimum of a particular objective is attained. In this paper,
a comparison between the optimization results for minimum mass, minimum consumed primary energy, and minimum cost is
conducted. A new initial sizing algorithm for general aviation aircraft with hybrid-electric propulsion systems is applied. This
initial sizing methodology covers point performance, mission performance analysis, the weight estimation process, and cost
estimation. The methodology is applied to the design of a STOL general aviation aircraft, intended for on-demand air mobility operations. The aircraft is sized to carry eight passengers over a distance of 500 km, while able to take off and land from
short airstrips. Results indicate that parallel hybrid-electric propulsion systems must be considered for future STOL aircraft.
Keywords Hybrid-Electric · Aircraft Sizing · Aircraft Design · STOL · Optimization Objectives
Abbreviations
AR	Aspect ratio
BSFC	Brake-specific fuel consumption
cD	Coefficient of drag
cL	Coefficient of lift
E	Energy
e	Oswald’s efficiency factor
EM	Electric motor
GA	General aviation
HE	Hybridization of energy
HP	Hybridization of power
ICE	Internal combustion engine
ISA	International standard atmosphere
k	Induced drag factor
L/D	Lift-to-drag ratio
m	Mass
min	Minutes
* D. Felix Finger
f.finger@fh‑aachen.de
1

FH-Aachen, Institute of Aircraft Engineering,
Hohenstaufenallee 6, 52064 Aachen, Germany

2

RMIT University, School of Engineering, Plenty Rd,
Bundoora, VIC 3083, Australia

MSL	Mean sea level
MTOM	Maximum take-off mass
ODAM	On-demand air mobility
P/W	Power-to-weight ratio
PE	Primary energy
PEF	Primary energy factors
S	Area
STOL	Short take-off and landing
t/c	Thickness-to-chord ratio
TLAR	Top-level aircraft requirement
TRL	Technology readiness level
UAM	Urban air mobility
VTOL	Vertical take-off and landing
W	Weight
W/S	Wing loading
w0	Design gross weight

1 Introduction
Aircraft design is an optimization task. To find the best aircraft for a set of requirements, different design parameters
must be varied in such a way that a minimum of a particular
cost function is attained. For example, design trades can be

13

Vol.:(0123456789)

714

carried out for P/W and W/S, aspect ratio and taper ratio,
wing sweep, airfoil thickness, propulsion parameters, fuselage fineness ratio, even configuration trades and many other
parameters [1].
Consequently, a large number of variables must be optimized in such a way that an objective function is minimized
while satisfying performance and mission constraints. Such
“everything-optimization” would require an extremely large
number of data points and is not reasonable, especially in the
early stages of design. To make the optimization applicable
to the aircraft conceptual design process and limit computational time, the optimization task is carried out with a significantly reduced set of variables. Only variables that have high
interdependency are selected for the optimization process.
Initial sizing is typically the very first step in the conceptual design process, and it is already an optimization
task. Because it is the first step, it is typically carried out
with the lowest number of design variables and design constraints. This reduces accuracy but increases efficiency. This
is crucial, as a large number of different designs must be
evaluated.
Traditionally, the optimization problem during initial sizing can be stated as minimize MTOM by varying P/W and
W/S while satisfying performance and mission constraints.
These parameters are selected because the installed power
and wing reference area are the main design drivers of conventional aircraft. Hence, P/W and W/S are chosen such that
the optimization objective is minimized. Typically, mass is
chosen as the measure of merit [2], as it can also be a substitute for cost. For conventional aircraft, the lowest MTOM
is usually obtained by the smallest wing and installing the
lightest and smallest propulsion system possible. Wing size
strongly influences aerodynamics, and the propulsion system
is the main driver of fuel mass.
For hybrid-electric aircraft, propulsive power is one of
the central design parameters, as well. However, the initial
sizing optimization of hybrid-electric aircraft requires a third
parameter to determine the size of the propulsion system: the
level of hybridization of power HP. HP determines the size
of the electric system in relation to the combustion engine.
Therefore, the optimization problem during the initial sizing for hybrid-electric aircraft must be stated as minimize
MTOM by varying P/W, HP, and W/S while satisfying performance and mission constraints.
However, it is uncertain if the best optimization strategy
for hybrid-electric aircraft is the same as for conventional
aircraft. Is the “best” aircraft still obtained by minimizing
MTOM, or should other measures of merit be used?
To answer these questions, this paper applies an initial
sizing algorithm for general aviation aircraft with hybridelectric propulsion systems, which was developed at FH
Aachen. The methodology is exemplarily applied to the
design of a STOL (short take-off and landing) general

13

D. F. Finger et al.

aviation aircraft, intended for on-demand air mobility operations. In this study, a comparison between optimization
results for minimum mass, minimum consumed primary
energy, and minimum cost is conducted, with specific focus
on the determination of an optimal degree of hybridization,
with respect to the particular optimization objective. The
impact of the optimization goal on this parameter is carefully investigated.
This paper is structured the following way: following this
introduction, the methodology for the sizing and technology
factors are discussed in Sect. 2. In Sect. 3, an overview of
the aircraft concept is provided, and notional aircraft designs
are presented. Then in Sect. 4, the sizing results are carefully
assessed, and the findings are explained. Finally, Sect. 5
gives a comprehensive conclusion.

2 Methodology
“In aircraft conceptual design, the initial sizing process
is used to determine values for maximum take-off weight
(MTOM), wing reference area, and thrust of a new aircraft
concept based on certain top-level aircraft requirements
(TLARs). Results from initial sizing will be used to draw the
first design. Then, a more detailed sizing process is started,
which leads to a refined design.” [3]

2.1 Matching diagram for parallel‑hybrid electric
aircraft
At the Institute of Aircraft Engineering at FH Aachen, a tool
for the initial sizing of general aviation aircraft has been
developed. It allows sizing of conventional, fully electric,
and hybrid-electric aircraft. The methodology of the sizing process is documented in [4]. Good results for conventional take-off and landing general aviation aircraft were
achieved, as shown in [3, 5, 6]. Recently, the tool has also
been expanded to allow sizing of VTOL aircraft [7].
Since these methods are well documented, only a very
brief introduction of the tool will be provided here.
The sizing tool’s goal is the identification of an overall
optimal design point in terms of power-to-weight ratio (P/W)
and wing loading (W/S), as well as the determination of the
corresponding degree of hybridization. Analog to the classical method for initial sizing (e.g., [8–10]), the methodology is
separated into point performance and mission performance.
The methodology of the point performance part largely
conforms to the classical procedure. Top-level aircraft
requirements are transformed into performance constraints,
and the design point is searched in the conventional design
region of the matching diagram with respect to a specified
objective function. However, the rule that prescribes the
position of the conventional design point cannot be applied

Mass, primary energy, and cost: the impact of optimization objectives on the initial sizing…

anymore, as the classical procedure does not apply to hybridelectric aircraft [5]. Consequently, for every considered
design point, a complete mission performance analysis has to
be performed to evaluate the objective function. Afterward,
all considered design points have to be compared concerning the design objective to identify the optimal design point.
In the course of this process, the optimal degree of
hybridization of power (HP) is calculated by gradually dividing the overall power demand arising from each considered
design point to the electric motors (EM) and the internal
combustion engines (ICE). This subdivision results in socalled split points, as illustrated in the constraint diagram
shown in Fig. 1. By evaluating the objective function for
multiple design- and split point combinations, the overall
optimal result can be determined.
The mission performance analysis is based on the classical iterative process, as presented in [1] or [11]. However, to
cover the mix of consumable (carbon-based fuels) and nonconsumable (batteries) energy sources on board, the masses
are not treated as fractions, as it is usually done in initial sizing, but as absolute values. Therefore, the mission is broken
into a large number of short segments and simulated, using
a universally valid, energy-based approach.
For each mission segment, the transport energy demand
is computed with respect to the current flight attitude.
Energy demands can arise from aerodynamic drag, acceleration (kinetic energy), altitude change (potential energy),
and ground friction. The transport energy is divided into
energy delivered by consumable sources and non-consumable sources by the degree of hybridization of energy (HE)
of the considered mission phase. HE is defined as the ratio
between energy from non-consumable carriers and the transport energy provided in total in a time segment.
While the mission is simulated incrementally, the energy
is converted to fuel mass and battery mass using efficiency
models. To sum up the MTOM, the mass estimation for the
powertrain components is conducted using dedicated models, as well as the computation of the aircraft’s empty mass

715

on the basis of sophisticated empty mass methods [9]. Based
on this MTOM, the next iteration step is started. The iteration stops when a certain mass convergence is reached.

2.2 Determination of optimal parameter
combinations
To determine the combination of P/W, W/S, HP, which leads
to an optimum for a defined objective function for a specific
flight mission, the hybrid-electric design space, limited by
performance constraints, must be analyzed. This requires
that, for combinations of P/W, W/S, and HP, the value of
the objective function has to be determined. This is done by
applying a mission performance analysis to compute parameters which are relevant to calculate the value of the objective function (e.g., MTOM, energy, cost, etc.), using the fast
initial sizing analysis, and using the result for the following
more detailed design work.
The design optimization can be performed using numerical tools, or by populating the entire design space and plotting the result. The former method gives a fast result, and
the latter allows the user to gain further understanding of
the design space.
To gain this visual insight, the whole design space must
be analyzed for varying values of P/W and W/S, as well as
for different values of HP and HE. The values of the objective function are then plotted and superimposed with the
performance constraints. Such a figure is shown in Fig. 2
as a hybrid-electric initial sizing example. Figure 2 links all
performance constraints to the MTOMs of differently sized
aircraft—each with a different parameter combination.
Such a plot also exists for classical designs and is sometimes called a “performance thumbprint” [12].
For aircraft without hybrid-electric propulsion, such a
thumbprint plot would be the result of unconstrained optimization. Then the designs below the design line would not
meet one or more of the performance constraints. As an
example, such plots could be used for requirement trades.

Fig. 1  Matching diagram for
parallel hybrid electric aircraft
[4]

13

716

D. F. Finger et al.

Fig. 2  Thumbprint plot of an exemplary design space exploration [4]

In the context of this new methodology, the thumbprint
plot is used differently: Every design on such a plot fulfills
all constraints because each P/W is sized up to the design
line. Basically, any point on the plot indicates how much of
the P/W is provided by the combustion engine.
Any point above the design line is a conventional aircraft,
without any hybridization (HP = 0). Any point on the x-axis
is a fully electric aircraft (HP = 1).

2.3 Optimization objectives
2.3.1 Maximum take‑off mass
The minimization of MTOM is usually the goal during aircraft design since it is widely acknowledged that “the lightest
aircraft that does the job is considered the best” [13]. Boeing engineers found that for a given set of top-level requirements, the lightest aircraft performed best over a range of
operating conditions [2]. Besides, designers traditionally use
aircraft weight to predict cost, as cost scales almost linearly
with aircraft weight [14, 15].
If this reasoning still holds up for hybrid-electric aircraft
is debatable. For this reason, this study is conducted.
2.3.2 Primary energy consumption
Another suitable measure for assessing aircraft is their
energy consumption. However, if only the energy consumption during flight is assessed, the environmental impact of
each flight is not fully captured. The reduction of efficiency
that is caused by sourcing energy and delivering it to the

13

aircraft must be accounted for. This can be done by primary
energy factors (PEF).
Primary energy (PE) is a measure for the total energy
that was expended to extract energy from natural resources
and to provide the extracted energy to the consumer. Gasoline fuel, for example, has to be refined from raw oil, which
needs to be extracted from oilfields. The energy to produce
the fuel is summed up in the PEF. The factors for Germany
are 1.17 for fossil carbon-based fuel and 2.80 for electricity
(data from [16], dated 2016). The factor for electricity is that
high, because of Germany’s electrical energy mix. Coalburning and nuclear power plants have a big share, which
have a high PEF, as the thermal efficiency of the power stations needs to be accounted for.
Nevertheless, as an EM is over three times as efficient as
an ICE, there is still a net benefit in PE consumption that can
be obtained by operating electric aircraft.
2.3.3 Production and procurement cost
The estimation of the cost of developing an aircraft is an
essential part of any aircraft’s design process [8]. Typically,
cost estimation models are used to determine the development and procurement cost of an aircraft already in the early
design stages. In this stage, the design can still be changed
easily, and different approaches to a set of top-level requirements can be tried and evaluated. When hybrid-electric propulsion systems are assessed, costs are a significant consideration. Thus, the traditional methods need to be updated for
hybrid-electric aircraft.
To estimate the development and procurement cost
of a new aircraft, Eastlake’s GA DAPCA-IV model [17]

Mass, primary energy, and cost: the impact of optimization objectives on the initial sizing…

is modified, as explained in [18]. The modified method
requires extra adjustment factors that consider the additional
effort that the implementation of a hybrid-electric propulsion
system requires. Total program costs include
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Engineering labor costs
Tooling labor costs
Manufacturing labor costs
Manufacturing materials costs
Development support costs
Flight test costs
Quality control costs

To determine the selling price, insurance and profit are
added.
This optimization goal was selected to analyze whether
the old correlation (“the lightest aircraft is the cheapest”) is
still valid. The author’s experience shows that the development of hybrid-electric aircraft is significantly more expensive compared to a conventional aircraft. This is due to the
additional complexity of such a system, which increases the
required time to design and test it. Naturally, this is reflected
in the sales price. However, it is assumed that this increase
in pricing will be offset by reduced operating costs.
2.3.4 Operating cost
The operator of an aircraft needs to determine his cost to
operate a new aircraft. This information is used to determine
the price of the service offer.
Total service provision costs comprise of three components: variable direct operating costs (VDOC), fixed direct
operating costs (FDOC), and indirect operating costs (IOC).
• VDOC cover energy costs, operating crew costs, landing

charges, and maintenance costs.

• FDOC include depreciation of the aircraft (a function of

the procurement cost), insurance, annual inspections, and
storage costs.
• IOC comprise capital expenditures for the aircraft as well
as selling, general, and administration (SG&A) expenses.
When estimating the operating costs, predominantly
VDOC components need to be adjusted for hybrid-electric
aircraft. The method is explained in detail in [18], where
the authors modified the cost estimation approaches from
[19] and [20]. Energy and battery costs represent additional
components as part of VDOC, and the calculation of maintenance costs differs. Additionally, as the sales price of hybridelectric aircraft is increased, the fixed operating costs change
as well.
Thus, there will have to be a balance between an
increase in fixed cost and a decrease in variable cost for

717

hybrid-electric aircraft to make sense financially. While
the reduction of the environmental impact should be a consideration for air service providers, this goal will be much
more readily achieved if being eco-friendlier also increases
shareholder value by reducing the service provision cost.
Therefore, it will be interesting to see if the minimization
of operating costs will yield any benefit in terms of PE
consumption.

3 A STOL aircraft concept for on‑demand air
mobility
Interest in the concept of ODAM, or air taxi operations is a
recurring theme in aviation. The common notion is to use
small aircraft to provide near-on-demand air transportation.
Because general aviation (GA) aircraft are used, the service
providers can operate from small airfields that are much
closer to the origin and destination points. These kinds of
operations are conducted either with small propeller aircraft
or with light jets [21].
When Uber published their 2016 white paper [22], they
took a more aggressive approach towards on-demand air
mobility (ODAM). Uber proposes an air service that operates vertical take-off and landing (VTOL) aircraft. With a
focus on a very short-range inter-urban mission and a specific focus on electric propulsion, they propose to fly directly
within cities that suffer from gridlock and thus minimize
travel time. These inner-city air taxi operations are also
referred to as urban air mobility (UAM) [23].
The Uber concept of UAM generated a lot of interest and
investment from venture capital. However, electric VTOL
aircraft are very challenging to design, require an extremely
high thrust-to-weight ratio compared to GA aircraft, and
present a high certification risk [24].
A less complex alternative to VTOL can be found in short
take-off and landing (STOL) aircraft. STOL aircraft take of
similarly to conventional aircraft but can do so in a much
shorter distance. They also allow much steeper climb-out
and glideslope paths, thereby reducing their noise footprint
compared to conventional GA aircraft. In addition, STOL
aircraft can be hand-flown by a trained pilot. VTOL aircraft
cannot be controlled in such a way. Instead, they require a
full authority fly-by-wire control system. Therefore, STOL
aircraft offer compelling arguments to consider them over
VTOL platforms. In this paper, an initial sizing approach is
used to analyze the performance of this aircraft class.
To operate any aircraft in an urban environment, several
conditions have to be met: Of course, as for all aviation systems, safety is paramount, but another key priority is to keep
the impact on the urban population minimal. Therefore, the
key features are low noise and a small footprint. A significant noise reduction can be obtained by low disk-loading

13

718

D. F. Finger et al.

propulsors and new propulsion configurations. These factors
will be taken into consideration when designing the aforementioned configurations.

3.1 Design requirements and mission
A new initial sizing methodology will be applied to the
design of a STOL aircraft, intended for ODAM operations.
The aircraft will carry eight people, covering distances of
up to 500 km.
The key design requirements are
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.

Number of passengers (including pilot): 8.
Design range (without reserves): 500 km.
Cruise speed of 66 m/s.
Take-off ground roll distance: 150 m.
Stall speed: 25 m/s.
Propulsion system: parallel-hybrid electric.
Battery technology level: 250 Wh/kg, 500 Wh/kg,
1000 Wh/kg. 20C discharge rate.

3.1.1 Payload
The payload requirement is set to 800 kg. If the mass of an
average adult male in winter clothing is assumed as 93 kg
(as per FAA AC 120-27E [25]), this leaves 7 kg for carryon
luggage per passenger. This is deemed acceptable for the
ODAM mission. If a higher baggage capacity per person is
required, the number of passengers must be reduced. This is
typical for small aircraft.
3.1.2 Range and cruise speed
The parameter combination of design range and cruise speed
ensures that the typical mission duration does not exceed
2.5 h. This, in turn, leads to passengers not spending excessive time in a small environment without access to a lavatory. It is assumed that the typical mission duration which
is flown in service with this kind of aircraft is closer to 1 h.
For ranges beyond 500 km, the advantage of small aircraft
is lost in any case, as traditional airline transportation is a
lot more competitive.
3.1.3 STOL performance
The take-off ground roll distance is set at 150 m. This is
a typical value for STOL aircraft, like the Antonov AN-2
or Dornier’s Do-27, and should allow the aircraft to clear
a 15 m obstacle within 300 m. According to [26], the chosen stall speed of 25 m/s allows landing within the same
distance.

13

3.1.4 Propulsion system
For any STOL aircraft, a hybrid-electric propulsion system
is expected to deliver superior performance compared to a
conventional propulsion system, because the power needed
for a short take-off is much greater than the power needed for
cruise, while this excess power is only required for a fraction
of the total flight time. This power-matching problem can be
solved with a balanced hybrid propulsion system.
Because electric motors have a vastly higher power-toweight ratio than internal combustion engines (currently
about 5 kW/kg vs. 1 kW/kg), they limit the weight increase
due to high installed power requirements. Arguably, this
advantage is offset by a weight increase due to the battery
system. With today’s battery technology, this forbids the
continuous use of battery power. For this reason, hybridelectric propulsion configurations are used. Because batteries are heavy, it is recommended to bias the operational
strategy of the hybrid system towards using the ICE. If the
required power can be delivered by the ICE, then the electric
system is not used. Only if the required power is higher than
the ICE’s maximum power (e.g., during take-off and climb),
the EM is activated and delivers the necessary additional
power. This strategy is also known as peak-load shaving, as
the EM “shaves” the peak load off the ICE. Consequently,
the battery’s energy must be made available over a short portion of the total flight time. As shown in [3], parallel-hybrid
systems outperform serial-hybrid systems significantly, if
they are compared on equal terms. The serial-hybrid propulsion system, per definition, cannot be as efficient as the
parallel-hybrid. However, the system design is simplified,
and overall complexity is reduced. Additionally, some aircraft configurations (e.g., distributed propulsion) can only
be explored with such a system. Therefore, they do have a
place in the overall design space. Because this technology is
not the focus of this study, the serial-hybrid configuration is
not considered for this study. More information on hybridelectric propulsion systems can be found in [27].
In this paper, a parallel hybrid-electric propulsion configuration is studied. ICE and EM work in conjunction. They
are coupled to the same propulsor via a gearbox.
Furthermore, if the parallel-hybrid configuration is analyzed, naturally, fully electric and fully-conventional configurations can be explored as well. These configurations
correspond to hybridization ratios of 1 and 0, respectively.
This study will be conducted for three different levels of
battery technology. The best battery packs today offer an
energy density of about 200 Wh/kg. In an Aviation Week
article [28], Uber’s goals are quoted as “300 Wh/kg at the
pack level by 2023”. Batteries with 400–500 Wh/kg at pack
level are considered, about twice what is available today,
are believed to enable widespread use of electric propulsion
systems in aviation.

719

Mass, primary energy, and cost: the impact of optimization objectives on the initial sizing…
Table 1  Mission definition

Segment and prescribed time

Distance (km)

Speed (m/s)

1. Ground taxi (5 min)
2. Take-off + reserve (5 min at max
power)
3. Accelerate, climb
4. Cruise
5. Loiter (45 min)
6. Decelerate, descend
7. Landing
8. Ground taxi (5 min)

No range credit

5
0 to 1.2 v­ Stall

Fig. 3  Mission definition

500
No range credit

Altitude AGL
(ending) (m)
0
100

v for best climb rate
66
v for best endurance
v for best range
1.2 ­vStall to 0
5

500 km at 66 m/s
Climb to
2000m

2000
2000
2000
100
0
0

45 min

Descend
to MSL

Accordingly, the specific energies used in this study were
selected as 250 Wh/kg for the year 2020 technology level
and 500 Wh/kg for an advanced technology level. As a “what
if” consideration, 1000 Wh/kg batteries are also considered.

3.2 Mission
For the sizing studies of Sect. 4, a simple mission definition
is considered. After a brief ground taxi, the aircraft takes
off after a 150 m ground roll, then accelerates and climbs to
2000 m altitude. It cruises for a distance of 500 km and then
loiters 45 min to fulfill the mandated IFR reserve flight time.
Then follows, descend, landing, and another taxi phase. To
cover any abnormal situations like go-arounds, the initial
take-off is assumed as a 5-min period at maximum power.
The mission is flown using standard atmospheric conditions, and take-off is at ISA MSL.
A tabular and graphical overview of the missions is provided in Table 1 and Fig. 3, respectively.

3.3 Notional ODAM concept
For this sizing study, a notional air taxi concept aircraft has
been designed. The concept is shown in Fig. 4. The configuration is a traditional high-wing twin-prop design somewhat
reminiscent of the Aero Commander aircraft family. Eight
passengers are seated in 4 rows of two seats.
A high aspect ratio wing is used for low induced drag.
For structural considerations, a 15% thick airfoil is used at
the wing root. The wing thickness tapers off to 12% at the

Fig. 4  STOL ODAM concept

wing tip. The wing spar is run over the top of the cabin. This
requires a fairing of the wing-fuselage junction but allows
for additional headroom in the cabin. It is also a very light
solution. A low empty weight is paramount for STOL aircraft, where low-speed performance is a prime consideration. For stability, a conventional tail is chosen.
The propulsion system is mounted in the nacelles. The
nacelles are large enough to house the engine-motor-gearbox combination, as well as the batteries and the retractable
gear. This way, a significant amount of weight is carried
on the wing, reducing the wing root bending moment and
contributing to a lighter design. The wing provides more
than enough space for fuel, especially because the range is
restricted at 500 km. This allows to dedicate a large portion
of the wing to high-lift devices and thereby obtain a high
maximum lift coefficient.

13

720

D. F. Finger et al.

The aircraft is equipped with retractable tricycle gear.

3.4 Sizing assumptions
Because of constant and rapid improvements in the field of
electrical system technologies, it is difficult to accurately
predict the level of performance that hybrid-electric air
taxis can offer, even if only near term projections are made.
Therefore, a reference for the technological assumptions
must be set.
For the sizing study, three levels of battery technology are
used. All assumptions are summarized in Table 2.
3.4.1 Combustion engines
Because this paper explores the influence of electric systems
on the performance of aircraft, the state of technology of the
conventional combustion engines is kept constant to avoid
too many parameter variations. Combustion engine specific
power and fuel consumption is held constant at the values
shown in Table 2. For this study, typical values obtained by
traditional four-stroke aviation engines (see, e.g., [8]) were
selected.
3.4.2 Motors
For electric motors, similar technological assumptions were
made. A specific power of 5 kW/kg is already achieved by
Siemens with their motor for the electric Extra 300 [29].
While this is still a prototype, its TRL is assumed to improve
by 2020.
3.4.3 Batteries
The battery is sized with respect to the following
considerations:
• The full design mission must be flown with 80% of the

remaining capacity. The bottom 20% capacity is consid-

The battery’s specific power is determined by considering
the same 20C discharge capability for all levels of specific
energy. Lithium batteries can already deliver these high
C-rates today, but typically at a low specific energy level.
Therefore, this must be considered an optimistic assumption.
However, as future projections are used for all batteries, this
is considered acceptable within the scope of this study.
The timeline for development of such advanced batteries is hard to predict. Today, battery packs with 250 Wh/kg
are available, but their low discharge rate and limited cycle
life prevents them from widespread use. Battery packs with
500 Wh/kg might be available in the mid-2030s, if the current trend of an 8% increase in specific energy is continued.
Still, this will require innovation in cell chemistries and pack
design and integration. A timeline for 1000 Wh/kg batteries
cannot be predicted at this stage [30].
Further information on the impact of battery performance
on the design of hybrid-electric aircraft can be found in Ref.
[31].
The operational strategy of the hybrid system is biased
to using the ICE. In each flight phase, the required power
is compared to the available power. If the required power
can be delivered by the ICE, then the electric system is not
used. Only if the required power is higher than the ICE’s
maximum power (e.g., during take-off and climb), the EM
is activated and delivers the necessary additional power.
This strategy is also known as peak-load shaving, as the
EM “shaves” the peak load off the ICE. Therefore, the battery’s energy must be made available over a short portion of
the total flight time.
3.4.4 Aerodynamic performance

Table 2  Technology levels
Technology assumption

Technology level

Combustion engine technology
ICE specific power (kW/kg)
ICE BSFC (g/kW/h)
EM specific power (kW/kg)
Battery specific energy (Wh/kg)
Battery discharge C-rate
Flap system
CLmax
Wempty without engines/W0 [–]

4-stroke ICE
1.0
315
5.0
250–500–1000
20C
Fowler flaps
2.5
0.743 W0−0.06

13

ered unavailable. This prevents the battery from deep
discharge and reduces the voltage drop-off at the end of
the mission. This is a measure intended to improve both
safety and battery life.
• Missions start with the battery fully charged.
• The battery is not recharged over the course of the flight.
• All specific energy values are given at pack level.

The aerodynamic efficiency of the design is estimated rather
conservatively with the help of drag-buildup methods.
A significant allowance is made for trim drag, cooling
drag, wheel well gaps, flap tracks, and other undesirable
drag. This brings the ­CDminDrag to about 300 counts. This
drag coefficient is achieved at the lift coefficient for minimum drag ­CLminDrag = 0.17.
Due to the interference effects of the fuselage and large
engine pods on the wing, Oswald’s aircraft efficiency factor
is chosen conservatively, as e = 0.63. The aircraft drag polar
is described as

721

Mass, primary energy, and cost: the impact of optimization objectives on the initial sizing…

(CL − CLminD )2
,
𝜋 ⋅ AR ⋅ e

Power-to-weight rao [W/kg]

CD = CDminD +

(CL − 0.17)2
.
CD = 0.03 +
𝜋 ⋅ 9 ⋅ 0.63
The performance is showcased in Fig. 5.

3.5 Matching diagram
These top-level requirements are then translated into the
matching diagram, which is shown in Fig. 6.
It should be no surprise that the matching diagram for
the notional STOL aircraft is dominated by the take-off-,
cruise speed-, and stall speed constraints. The requirement
for climb rate is chosen as 4.5 m/s in the all engines operating condition, and 1 m/s in the one-engine inoperative
(OEI) condition. These performance levels are easily surpassed because the aircraft must be sized with respect to
take-off and cruise constraints.
Secondary constraints like loiter or speed for a constant
energy turn are neglected at this design stage.

250

250

225

225

200

200

175

175

150

150

125

125

100

100

75

75

50

50

25

25

0

0
300 400 500 600 700 800 900 1000

Wing Loading [N/m²]
Cruise Speed
Stall Speed
Rate-of-Climb
Rate-of-Climb OEI
Take-off Distance

Fig. 6  Matching diagram

cL

3.6 Cost estimation assumptions
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2

1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-0.2

Air Taxi Drag Polar

0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1

0.12

cD

cL/cD, cL^(3/2) / cD

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

1.0

1.2

1.4
18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0

cL/cD
cL^(3/2) / cD
0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8
cL

Fig. 5  Aerodynamic performance

1.0

1.2

1.4

The following assumptions were made for the production
and procurement cost estimation calculations:
•
•
•
•
•

Certification under CS-23 rules
Production of 125 aircraft over a 5-year period
A learning curve of 0.95
15% insurance premium on the total production cost
10% profit margin on the total production cost

The fixed cost for the propulsion system is defined as
follows:
•
•
•
•

Combustion engines: 174 $/hp
Electric motors: 150 $/hp
Power management system: 150 $/hp
Batteries: 210 $/kWh

No attempt is made to model improvements in the price
of these systems in the future.
The following assumptions were made for the operating
cost estimation calculations:
• Fuel price of 3.3 $/kg
• Electricity price of 0.4 $/kWh
• Ratio of flight hours to maintenance hours of 0.3

13

722

D. F. Finger et al.

Design Point
MTOM [kg]
W/S [N/m²]
P/W [W/kg]
HP [-]
HEaverage [-]
PE [MJ]
mfuel [kg]
mbattery [kg]
Production Cost [k$]
Ops Cost [$/h]
∆MTOM
∆Primary Energy
∆cost
∆ops Cost

Conventional
Min
Min
Min
Design Point
MTOM Primary Energy Production Cost
2736
2736
2982
2736
603.0
603.0
852.5
603.0
112.9
112.9
185.0
112.9
43.3%
3.7%
11639
11639
9777
11639
246
246
201
246
125
1695
1695
2423
1695
424
424
416
424
Relative change compared to conventional baseline
0.0%
9.0%
0.0%
0.0%
-16.0%
0.0%
baseline
0.0%
42.9%
0.0%
0.0%
-1.9%
0.0%

Fig. 7  Sizing results: 250 Wh/kg batteries

13

Min
Ops Cost
2822
662.5
129.0
10335
218
1789
405
3.1%
-11.2%
5.5%
-4.5%

723

Mass, primary energy, and cost: the impact of optimization objectives on the initial sizing…

Design Point
MTOM [kg]
W/S [N/m²]
P/W [W/kg]
HP [-]
HEaverage [-]
PE [MJ]
mfuel [kg]
mbattery [kg]
Production Cost [k$]
Ops Cost [$/h]
∆MTOM
∆primary Energy
∆cost
∆ops Cost

Conventional
Min
Min
Min
Design Point
MTOM Primary Energy Production Cost
2736
2663
2825
2736
603.0
792.5
956.8
603.0
112.9
166.6
218.6
112.9
46.0%
55.6%
3.4%
5.7%
11639
9749
8956
11639
246
201
182
246
54
89
1695
2111
2314
1695
424
397
391
424
Relative change compared to conventional baseline
-2.7%
3.3%
0.0%
-16.2%
-23.1%
0.0%
baseline
24.5%
36.5%
0.0%
-6.4%
-7.8%
0.0%

Min
Ops Cost
2752
940.0
213.0
58.7%
5.8%
9093
184
90
2238
387
0.6%
-21.9%
32.0%
-8.7%

Fig. 8  Sizing results: 500 Wh/kg batteries

13

724

D. F. Finger et al.

Design Point
MTOM [kg]
W/S [N/m²]
P/W [W/kg]
HP [-]
HEaverage [-]
PE [MJ]
mfuel [kg]
mbattery [kg]
Production Cost [k$]
Ops Cost [$/h]
∆MTOM
∆primary Energy
∆cost
∆ops Cost

Conventional
Min
Min
Min
Design Point
MTOM Primary Energy Production Cost
2736
2572
3566
2736
603.0
842.5
956.8
603.0
112.9
181.9
218.6
112.9
52.7%
100.0%
4.4%
100.0%
11639
9170
7971
11639
246
188
246
33
988
1695
2043
2514
1695
424
380
274
424
Relative change compared to conventional baseline
-6.0%
30.3%
0.0%
-21.2%
-31.5%
0.0%
baseline
20.5%
48.3%
0.0%
-10.4%
-35.4%
0.0%

Fig. 9  Sizing results: 1000 Wh/kg batteries

13

Min
Ops Cost
3566
902.5
200.9
100.0%
100.0%
8070
1001
2500
273
30.3%
-30.7%
47.5%
-35.6%

Mass, primary energy, and cost: the impact of optimization objectives on the initial sizing…

725

baseline which the hybridized propulsion versions can compete against. The relative changes in MTOM, PE consumption, cost, and operational cost, compared to this baseline,
are given in the bottom section of the table.
A fourth study is presented in Fig. 11. It focuses on
assessing the impact of the PE assumptions. This study is
explained in detail in Sect. 4.4.

4.1 Sizing results: 250 Wh/kg batteries

Fig. 10  Legend for Figs. 7, 8 and 9

• Battery is written off over 1000 cycles over a 10-year

period

• Aircraft is written off over a 10-year period
• Aircraft is operated 8 h per day with a 25 min turnaround

time.

4 Sizing studies
In this section, the sizing methodology is applied to study
the implications that hybrid-electric powertrains have on the
ODAM class of STOL aircraft.
The aerodynamic data obtained from the drag-build up
analysis are used for the sizing study, and the drag coefficients are held constant, regardless of the sizing result. This
approach favors aircraft with higher wing loadings since
drag coefficients are referenced to the wing area. However,
as the concept aircraft is reasonably close to the sizing
results, this systematical error is not significant in the overall
scope of accuracy. Especially for initial sizing, this methodology is industry practice and well established.
The sizing results are presented in Figs. 7, 8, 9. These
figures are structured in the following way: the thumbprint
plots for the respective optimization criteria are shown first.
They are split into MTOM optimization, PE optimization,
production cost (incl. profit) optimization, and operating cost
(per flight hour) optimization.
To save space, the legend for Figs. 7, 8, 9 is only given
once, in Fig. 10. The best points are indicated by markers in the thumbprint plots. The sizing results for the best
points are shown in tabulated form. This allows for easy
comparison. A “conventional” ODAM aircraft, powered
only by ICEs, is sized to the same requirements to provide a

When assessing the thumbprint plots of Fig. 7, it is evident
that only a fraction of the possible design space is filled
with contour lines. In the white-space of the hybrid-electric
design space (compare Fig. 1), no aircraft converged within
the mass limit of the CS-23’s commuter class (8618 kg).
Only conventional and some hybrid-electric designs converged within the mass limit. Other aircraft became too
heavy. Because the space of converged designs does not
extend down to the x-axis, it is shown that no fully electric
aircraft are possible for this set of requirements, if 250 Wh/
kg batteries are considered.
The conventional design point gives an MTOM of
2736 kg. This is a reasonable result for an 8-seat STOL
aircraft. The conventional design point is also the best
point when MTOM or production costs are optimized. No
hybrid-electric design improved these measures of merit.
This shows why conventional aircraft are typically designed
with the smallest possible engine.
For this very short mission, these conventional designs
only need to carry 246 kg of fuel. This fuel fraction of ~ 9.0%
is quite low compared to traditional aircraft. The short-range
mission enables such a low fuel fraction. In practice, such an
aircraft would be designed with a higher fuel fraction to offer
more range flexibility at a slight increase in aircraft size.
Another design point, however, still conventional, is best
for the lowest cost per flight hour. A slight increase in W/S
and P/W results in a 4.5% operating cost improvement. The
shift to higher wing loadings allows the L/D in cruise flight
to increase while operating the ICE at a slightly reduced
power setting, which in turn reduces fuel consumption.
This way, 11.2% PE reduction is obtained, even though the
aircraft is 5.5% heavier than the conventional and lightest
baseline aircraft.
The only hybrid-electric design for the 250 Wh/kg batteries is found when optimizing for minimal PE usage. The
design point is shifted to a significantly higher wing loading (41% increase) and, consequently, a higher P/W (64%
increase). ­HP indicates that just 57% of the installed power
is supplied by a combustion engine. For the short period
of take-off and climb out, the ICE is boosted by an EM.
However, as HE,average shows, this boost phase makes up only

13

726

D. F. Finger et al.

Contour Plot of Primary Energy [MJ]
Germany’s PE Factors

Contour Plot of Energy [MJ]
No PE Factors

Contour Plot of Primary Energy [MJ]
100% Renewable Electricity

Contour Plot of Primary Energy [MJ]
100% Renewable Electricity + CLmax increased to 3.1

Design Point
MTOM [kg]
W/S [N/m²]
P/W [W/kg]
HP [-]
HEaverage [-]
PE [MJ]
E [MJ]
mfuel [kg]
mbattery [kg]
Production Cost [k$]
Ops Cost [$/h]
∆MTOM
∆primary Energy
∆Energy

Conventional
Min PE
Min Energy
Design Point
2736
2825
2825
603.0
956.8
956.8
112.9
218.6
218.6
55.6%
55.6%
5.7%
5.7%
11639
8956
8956
9948
7475
7475
246
182
182
89
89
1695
2314
2314
424
391
391
Relative change compared to conventional baseline
3.3%
3.3%
-23.1%
-23.1%
baseline
-24.9%
-24.9%

Fig. 11  Sizing results: energy comparison

13

Min PE

Renewable Electricity

Min PE

CLmax=3.1
Renewable Electricity

2825
956.8
218.6
55.6%
5.7%
8608
7475
182
89
2314
391

2928
1077.5
259.6
67.3%
9.3%
8556
7511
180
150
2436
399

3.3%
-26.0%
-24.9%

7.0%
-26.5%
-24.5%

Mass, primary energy, and cost: the impact of optimization objectives on the initial sizing…

3.7% of the total consumed energy over the course of the
flight. Nevertheless, improving cruise L/D and downsizing
the ICE improves PE consumption by 16%. This corresponds
to a fuel burn reduction of 45 kg. However, as 125 kg batteries need to be carried, the total mass increases by 9%.
The production costs are increased significantly by 43%.
This is caused by the much longer development time that
is required by hybrid-electric systems. This sharp increase
can be observed as a jump of the iso-contour lines that
shows below the take-off constraint. Nevertheless, if the
aircraft’s price is written off over a period of 10 years, the
operating costs per flight hour are very slightly (1.9%) below
those of the conventional design. This shows the potential
that hybrid-electric aircraft have, once battery technology
improves. To quantify the possible improvements, the following studies are carried out.

4.2 Sizing results: 500 Wh/kg batteries
When compared to the 250-Wh/kg battery study, even doubling the battery specific energy to 500 Wh/kg is still not
sufficient to allow the entire design space to converge within
the CS-23 commuter class mass limit for this set of requirements (see Fig. 8). Nevertheless, reducing battery mass by
50% has a significant impact on the optimization results.
The conventional design point is only optimal when minimal production costs are the main objective. All other objectives are minimized by selecting a hybrid-electric aircraft.
The optimum design points for minimum operational cost
and minimum PE consumption are both situated close to
the stall speed wing loading constraint. They both feature
an ICE sized for cruise power requirements and an EM that
can boost the total power to meet the short take-off requirement. However, the ICE is slightly larger when optimizing
for minimum energy usage. This can be attributed to the fuel
consumption model that is used for this study. The minimum specific consumption is achieved at about 80% of the
rated power. Thus, slightly less fuel is consumed by using a
larger, heavier, and more expensive engine. Consequently,
if the aircraft is designed for minimum energy consumption,
it is slightly heavier and slightly more expensive. Still, the
absolute difference is quite small, and both energy and cost
reduction are just slightly different. A maximum reduction
of the cost per flight hour of 8.7% could be realized. This is
0.9% less than when optimizing for minimum consumption
of PE. Conversely, a maximum reduction of PE by 23.1%
is achieved, 1.1% less than when optimizing for minimum
cost per flight hour. The procurement cost of both aircraft is
over 30% more expensive. This shows that the reduction in
energy consumption is large enough to recover the increased
acquisition cost of a hybrid-electric aircraft. Nevertheless,
the average hybridization of energy is just slightly less than
6%. Therefore, the power shaving operational strategy shows

727

a rather large impact while keeping the battery size reasonable. However, this low number is slightly misleading: due
to the higher efficiency of electrical systems, compared to
ICEs, a lot more work is extracted from this small share of
energy.
The minimum mass design point represents somewhat of
a middle ground. It shows a small improvement for all measures of merit, but production cost. It, too, has an ICE sized
by the cruise conditions, but it does not feature an extreme
wing loading as the design for minimum operational cost or
for minimum PE consumption do. While the MTOM reduction is a mere 2.7% less than the conventional baseline, it
still uses 16.2% less PE and is 6.4% less expensive per flight
hour compared to that baseline. Still, it is significantly more
expensive, with a 24.5% procurement cost increase.
The reduction in fuel consumption of 43 kg is made up
for by a battery mass of 54 kg. The mass reduction is realized by having a smaller, lighter ICE and a significantly
lighter, but powerful EM.

4.3 Sizing results: 1000 Wh/Kg batteries
Doubling the battery specific energy again to 1000 Wh/kg
finally allows assessing most of the design space within the
limits of the CS-23 commuter class. As can be seen in Fig. 9,
only for these highly optimistic assumptions, fully electric
aircraft become a possibility.
It turns out that—at this technology level—fully electric
aircraft are indeed the best choice when the objectives are
minimum primary energy consumption or minimum cost
per flight hour. The design point for those objectives is not
exactly the same. However, the difference in performance
is very similar.
These fully electric aircraft are about 30% heavier than
the conventional baseline while consuming about 30% less
primary energy. Additionally, operational costs are reduced
by more than 35%. This means, in simplified terms, that it
would be possible to operate four of these aircraft instead
of three conventional aircraft while having the same operational cost and roughly the same environmental impact.
This shows that cost reduction and efficiency can go hand
in hand. At the same time, the reader is reminded that the
required technology level for this kind of performance will
most likely not be reached in the next few decades. When
acquiring these aircraft, at least a 50% premium over conventional aircraft is projected.
The fully electric designs carry about 1000 kg of batteries. This is about four times the fuel mass of the conventional design and shows how restricting the mass increase
of batteries really is.
The minimum mass design converged to a hybrid-electric design, which is quite similar to the one obtained for
500 Wh/kg batteries. This time, it is 6% lighter than the

13

728

baseline. However, at this level of technology, this design
is much inferior to the fully electric aircraft. It is much
more complex, requires additional infrastructure to refuel,
and the additional maintenance of the ICE is expensive. At
the same time, only a 10.4% cost per flight hour saving is
obtained while the procurement cost is 20.5% higher than
the baseline. The reduction of PE consumption is impressive
at 21.2%, but this is still less than what could be obtained by
going fully electric.
The lowest production costs are, again, achieved by
selecting the conventional design point. It is interesting to
see that a secondary local minimum for costs is formed about
the location of the design point of the minimum MTOM aircraft. However, production costs are still significantly higher
there than for a conventional design.

4.4 Sizing results: energy comparison
To assess the impact of the assumed PE factors, another
study is conducted. Using the 500 Wh/kg battery technology
assumption, the energy assessment is varied. In Fig. 11, four
different contour plots are shown.
1. This is the baseline plot of PE, using Germany’s PE factors, as for the previous studies.
2. This is a raw energy plot, assuming no PE multiplicators.
It still includes the propulsion system’s efficiency, which
was used to calculate the required raw energy to power
the aircraft.
3. Another PE contour plot is shown, but here the PE factor
of electricity is reduced to 0, which assumes that spending this energy has no environmental impact whatsoever. Electricity is assumed to be 100% renewable green
energy.
4. In this plot, electricity is still assumed to be 100% renewable green energy, but the design space is expanded to
higher wing loadings by assuming C
­ Lmax = 3.1. This is
a highly optimistic assumption.
The results show that the sizing outcome does not depend
on the way that energy consumption is assessed—at least for
this particular set of requirements. The best point for minimum PE, minimum raw energy, and minimum “green” PE
are always the same. When looking for the relative energy
efficiency improvements over the conventional baseline aircraft, all designs show an improvement of about 25%. However, there are subtle differences.
When hybrid-electric aircraft are compared using the raw
energy figure, it will always show a larger improvement over
the baseline, than using PE. This is natural, as a part of the
electrical systems efficiency is outweighed by the efficiency
chain required to produce that energy. Conversely, assuming
100% renewable electrical energy will skew the numbers in

13

D. F. Finger et al.

favor of hybrid-electric designs. As can be seen in Fig. 11,
the contour lines are extended significantly towards lower
split-points and, therefore, higher levels of hybridization.
However, the best design point for these objectives does not
change. It is always situated right at the maximum wing
loading constraint, and the split-point is always slightly
above the cruise speed and climb rate constraints.
To check the influence of the stall speed constraint,
another “what-if” study is conducted, and the maximum
lift coefficient is raised to 3.1. This expands the design
space and allows to find an unconstrained optimum. It is
interesting to see that none of the other optimization points
(MTOM, production cost, and operating cost) change as the
design space is expanded. However, the minimum PE point
moves to the right in the matching diagram, as expected.
The best PE split-point is now located slightly below
the climb rate constraints, but still above the cruise speed
constraint. This allows the aircraft to cruise on the ICE,
while the higher wing loading results in a higher cruise
L/D. Because this optimum is not a constraint optimum, it
could be reached with C
­ Lmax = 2.81, or the stall speed could
be reduced to 23.8 m/s. Still, the PE consumption is just
very slightly increased (26.5% vs 26.0% for the other green
energy example), and the raw energy consumption is actually slightly increased (− 24.5% vs − 24.9%), as is MTOM
(7% increase vs. a 3.3% increase for the constrained design
point).
Nevertheless, this study shows how easily results can
be skewed by making certain assumptions when assessing
designs. This is even more true when fully electric aircraft
are considered.

5 Conclusion
In this paper, it has been shown that the traditional sizing
optimization assumptions should not be used for future
hybrid-electric aircraft.
For conventional designs, selecting the design point,
which allows the lowest installed P/W does indeed result in
the lightest aircraft, which will also be the cheapest design
to produce. This design point is also reasonably close to
the point for minimum operating costs. However, analysis
confirms that this design point should not be used as the
default design point for aircraft with parallel-hybrid electric
propulsion systems. Once battery technology progresses, the
freedom to split the installed power between an ICE and an
EM allows for much better solutions. Typically, wing loading is increased for improved cruise performance, while the
EM is used to boost the installed power to meet the take-off
performance requirements.
Optimizing a STOL ODAM aircraft concept for different measures of merit revealed that unique best points for

Mass, primary energy, and cost: the impact of optimization objectives on the initial sizing…

minimum MTOM, PE consumption, and operating cost
will be found when parallel-hybrid electric powertrains are
considered.
The minimum MTOM design point does result in aircraft with minimal production cost. This is true for conventional and hybrid-electric aircraft. However, due to
the additional design and testing effort inherent to hybridelectric aircraft, conventional aircraft will be significantly
cheaper to produce, even if the hybrid-electric aircraft
might be a few percent lighter.
Nevertheless, even though this increased purchasing
price of hybrid-electric aircraft is considered when the
operating costs are calculated, the improvement in energy
efficiency makes it cheaper to operate hybrid-electric aircraft in the long run. Interestingly, in this study, the ideal
design point for minimum operating cost and minimum
PE consumption are found very close to each other. This
shows that saving energy and reducing cost are not exclusive objectives, but go together rather well.
At the same time, the results indicate that the design
space must be analyzed specifically for these measures of
merit. The designer must not trust that a minimum mass
design will also be optimal from an energy consumption
or operating cost standpoint.
This paper has also attempted to give an overview of
the design space of STOL aircraft for ODAM applications. The authors are aware that due to the wide range
of available operational and technological opportunities,
the results of this study might not be generally applicable.
The design of hybrid-electric aircraft is both highly mission-critical and very sensitive to technology variations.
Nevertheless, the results of this sizing study allow some
interesting observations:
• With steady progress in battery technology, there are

opportunities to design new STOL aircraft that are
more energy and operating cost-efficient than aircraft
with conventional propulsion systems.
• Once battery technology progresses to the point that
fully electric aircraft become possible, their very high
efficiency is unbeatable from both an ecologic and
economic standpoint. However, this study shows that
a major breakthrough in battery technology is required
to get to this stage. A battery with 1000 Wh/kg that
allows a 20C discharge rate is unlikely to become a
reality in the next few decades.
• In the foreseeable future, parallel-hybrid electric propulsion
technology is likely to be the propulsion system of choice.
They offer significant benefits over conventional aircraft,
even though they will be more expensive to develop.
This case study clearly shows that hybrid-electric powertrains must seriously be considered for new ODAM

729

aircraft. Still, new concepts must be carefully evaluated
and optimized. This basis for such an evaluation must, of
course, be a proper initial sizing.
Acknowledgements Open Access funding provided by Projekt DEAL.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long
as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes
were made. The images or other third party material in this article are
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a
copy of this licence, visit http://creat​iveco​mmons​.org/licen​ses/by/4.0/.

References
1. Raymer, D.P.: Aircraft design: a conceptual approach, 6th edn.
AIAA, Reston (2018)
2. Jensen, S.C., Rettie, I.H., Barber, E.A.: Role of figures of merit in
design optimization and technology assessment. J. Aircr. 18(2),
76–81 (1981). https​://doi.org/10.2514/3.57468​
3. Finger, D.F., Braun, C., Bil, C.: Case studies in initial sizing for
hybrid-electric general aviation aircraft. In: AIAA/IEEE electric
aircraft technologies symposium (EATS), Cincinnati, IN, USA
(2018). https​://doi.org/10.2514/6.2018-5005
4. Finger, D.F., Braun, C., Bil, C.: Initial sizing methodology for
hybrid-electric light aircraft. J. Aircr., pp. 1–11 (2019). https​://
doi.org/10.2514/1.C0354​28
5. Rings, R., Ludowicy, J., Finger, D., Braun, C.: Sizing studies
of light aircraft with parallel hybrid propulsion systems. In 67,
Deutscher Luft- und Raumfahrtkongress 2018, Friedrichshafen,
Germany (2018). https​://doi.org/10.25967​/48022​7
6. Ludowicy, J., Rings, R., Finger, D.F., Braun, C.: Sizing studies of light aircraft with serial hybrid propulsion systems. In
67, Deutscher Luft- und Raumfahrtkongress DLRK 2018, Friedrichshafen, Germany (2018). https​://doi.org/10.25967​/48022​6
7. Finger, D.F., Götten, F., Braun, C., Bil, C.: Initial sizing for a
family of hybrid-electric vtol general aviation aircraft. In 67,
Deutscher Luft- und Raumfahrtkongress 2018, Friedrichshafen,
Germany (2018). https​://doi.org/10.25967​/48010​2
8. Gudmundsson, S.: General aviation aircraft design: applied methods and procedures. Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford (2014)
9. Roskam, J.: Airplane design Part I–VIII. Roskam Aviation and
Engineering Corp, Witchita (1985)
10. Sadraey, M.H.: Aircraft design: a systems engineering approach.
Wiley, Chichester (2013)
11. Nicolai, L.M., Carichner, G.E.: Fundamentals of aircraft and airship design—volume I—aircraft design. AIAA, Reston (2010)
12. Torenbeek, E.: Advanced aircraft design: conceptual design, analysis and optimization of subsonic civil airplanes. Wiley, Chichester (2013)
13. Mason, W.H.: Modern aircraft design techniques. In: Handbook of
Transportation Engineering, pp. 26.1–26.24, McGraw-Hill, New
York (2003)
14. Finger, D.F., Braun, C., Bil, C.: Impact of electric propulsion
technology and mission requirements on the performance of

13

730

15.

16.
17.
18.

19.
20.

21.

22.
23.
24.

D. F. Finger et al.
VTOL UAVs. CEAS Aeronaut J., pp. 827–843, (2019). https​://
doi.org/10.1007/s1327​2-018-0352-x
Rodas, E.A.E., Lewe, J.-H., Mavris, D.N.: Feasibility focused
design of electric on-demand aircraft concepts. In: 14th AIAA
aviation technology, integration, and operations conference,
Atlanta, GA, USA (2014). https​://doi.org/10.2514/6.2014-2856
Bundestag, W.D.D.: Sachstand: Primärenergiefaktoren. Deutscher
Bundestag, Berlin (2017)
Eastlake, C.N., Blackwell, H.W.: Cost estimating software for general aviation aircraft design. St. Louis (2000). https​://peer.asee.
org/8243
Finger, D.F., Braun, C., Bil, C.: Cost estimation methods for
hybrid-electric general aviation aircraft. In: Asia-Pacific international symposium on aerospace technology APISAT 2019, Gold
Coast, Australia (2019)
Kreimeier, M.: Evaluation of on-demand air mobility concepts
with utilization of electric powered small aircraft. RWTH Aachen,
Aachen (2018)
Hoelzen, J., Liu, Y., Bensmann, B., Winnefeld, C., Elham, A.,
Friedrichs, J., Hanke-Rauschenbach, R.: Conceptual design of
operation strategies for hybrid electric aircraft. Energies, p. 217
(2018). https​://doi.org/10.3390/en110​10217​
Mane, M., Crossley, W.: Preliminary cost feasibility study of air
taxi operations. In: 6th AIAA aviation technology, integration
and operations conference, Wichita, KS, USA (2006). https​://doi.
org/10.2514/6.2006-7734
Holden, J., Goel, N., Moore, M.D.: Fast-forwarding to a future of
on-demand urban air transportation. Uber, San Francisco (2016)
Johnson, W., Silva, C., Solis, E.: Concept vehicles for VTOL air taxi
operations. In: AHS technical conference on aeromechanics design
for transformative vertical flight, San Francisco, CA, USA (2018)
Finger, D.F., Braun, C., Bil, C.: A review of configuration design
for distributed propulsion transitioning VTOL aircraft. In:

13

25.
26.
27.

28.
29.

30.
31.

Asia-Pacific international symposium on aerospace technology
APISAT 2017, Seoul, Korea (2017)
Federal Aviation Administration: AC 120-27E—Aircraft weight
and balance control. Flight Standards Service, Washington, D.C.,
USA (2005)
McCormick, B.W.: Aerodynamics of V/STOL flight. Academic
Press, London (1967)
Finger, D.F., Götten, F., Braun, C., Bil, C.: On aircraft design
under the consideration of hybrid-electric propulsion systems. In: The Proceedings of the 2018 Asia-Pacific international symposium on aerospace technology (APISAT 2018),
pp. 1261–1272, Springer, Singapore (2018). https ​ : //doi.
org/10.1007/978-981-13-3305-7_99
Warwick, G.: Electric potential—Are battery technologies
advancing fast enough to enable eVTOL. Aviation Week and
Space Technology, pp. 38–41 (2017)
Warwick, G.: Siemens takes lead among emerging electric propulsion OEMs. 2 Apr 2018. [Online]. https:​ //aviat​ionwe​ek.com/
propu​lsion​/sieme​ns-takes​-lead-among​-emerg​ing-elect​r ic-propu​
lsion​-oems. Accessed 1 Sep 2019.
Misra, A.: Summary of 2017 NASA workshop on assessment
of advanced battery technologies for aerospace applications. In:
AIAA SciTech Forum 2018, Kissimmee, FL, USA (2018)
Finger, D.F., Braun, C., Bil, C.: Impact of battery performance
on the initial sizing of hybrid-electric general aviation aircraft. J.
Aerosp. Eng., pp. 1–18 (2020). https​://doi.org/10.1061/(ASCE)
AS.1943-5525.00011​13

Publisher’s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.

