CEAS Aeronautical Journal (2018) 9:533–543
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13272-018-0298-z
(0123456789().,-volV)(0123456789().
,- volV)

SHORT COMMUNICATION

Outlook on ecologically improved composites for aviation interior
and secondary structures
Jens Bachmann1 • Xiaosu Yi2 • Hugh Gong3 • Xavier Martinez4,5 • Gabriel Bugeda4,6 • Sergio Oller4,6 •
Konstantinos Tserpes7 • Eric Ramon8 • Christophe Paris9 • Pedro Moreira10 • Zhengping Fang11 • Yan Li12 •
Yanfeng Liu13 • Xiaoqing Liu14 • Guijun Xian15 • Jianfeng Tong16 • Jiahu Wei13 • Xufeng Zhang16 • Jin Zhu14
Songqi Ma14 • Tao Yu12

•

Received: 28 February 2017 / Revised: 6 March 2018 / Accepted: 17 March 2018 / Published online: 24 April 2018
Ó The Author(s) 2018

Abstract
Today, mainly man-made materials such as carbon and glass fibres are used to produce composite parts in aviation.
Renewable materials such as natural fibres or bio-sourced resin systems have not found their way into aviation, yet. The
project ECO-COMPASS aims to evaluate the potential applications of ecologically improved composite materials in the
aviation sector in an international collaboration of Chinese and European partners. Natural fibres such as flax and ramie
will be used for different types of reinforcements and sandwich cores. Furthermore, the bio-based epoxy resins to substitute
bisphenol-A based epoxy resins in secondary structures are under investigation. Adapted material protection technologies
to reduce environmental influence and to improve fire resistance are needed to fulfil the demanding safety requirements in
aviation. Modelling and simulation of chosen eco-composites aims for an optimized use of materials while a life cycle
assessment aims to prove the ecological advantages compared to synthetic state-of-the-art materials. In this paper, the
status of selected ecologically improved materials will be presented with an outlook for potential application in interior and
secondary structures.
Keywords Aviation  Eco-composite  Bio-fibre  Bio-resin  Interior  Secondary structure  Sandwich  Hybrid 
Recycling

1 Background
Lightweight structures made from composite materials have
gained in importance due to their excellent mechanical
properties combined with relatively low weight. Fibre reinforced polymers (FRP) enable the construction of lighter and
more efficient aircrafts resulting in the reduction of fuel
consumption and increased payloads. High performance
composites such as carbon-fibre reinforced plastics (CFRP)
are used in primary structures of modern aircrafts such as

Jens Bachmann and Xiaosu Yi are coordinators of the ECOCOMPASS project (http://www.eco-compass.eu).
& Jens Bachmann
jens.bachmann@dlr.de
& Xiaosu Yi
yi_xiaosu@sina.cn

Airbus A350 (Fig. 1) and Boeing 787 Dreamliner. They have
been used more and more to replace the classic materials
such as aluminium or titanium. Furthermore, glass fibre
reinforced plastics (GFRP) sandwich with phenolic resins as
matrix system find their application in the interior due to their
low weight to stiffness ratio.
But all these composite materials currently used in
aviation have one thing in common: they are man-made
and especially the carbon fibres are very energy intensive
in the production. Renewable materials such as bio-fibres
and bio-resins have been under investigation for a long
time for their use in composites but they have not been
introduced into a modern aircraft in noticeable amounts
yet.
From ecological perspective, composites such as GFRP
and CFRP typically consume a higher amount of energy
during the production phase compared to classic metals.
Furthermore, their intrinsic heterogenic structure impedes a
similar efficiency when it comes to recycling at the end of

Extended author information available on the last page of the article

123

534

Fig. 1 Materials used in a modern aircraft, the Airbus A350 [1]

life. A close-loop recycling as with metal is not possible
and leads mainly to downgraded recyclates. On the other
hand, the lightweight potential of GFRP and especially
CFRP is very valuable to reduce fuel consumption in
transportation applications depending on travel distance
and life-time. Here, the relation of ecological impact
between production phase and use-phase is shifted towards
the latter. Nevertheless, it is of high interest to reduce the
consumption of energy intensive carbon and glass fibres in
favour of bio-based fibres in certain applications.
As safety is of primary importance in aviation, the lack of
experience and confidence in the long-term performance and
mechanical properties of composites made of renewable
materials is still an obstacle for their usage. It is, therefore, at
the moment out of scope to substitute high performance and
safety-relevant composites such as CFRP or GLARE in
primary structural parts of the aircraft, for example, the
fuselage frame and the outer wing box, with bio-based
materials. On the other hand, secondary structures and
interior composites which are not stressed on such high
levels offer possible areas of application. Examples for
secondary structural parts are fairings and the landing gear
doors. In the interior, cabin ceiling panels, sidewalls and
floor panels are aims for the substitution of glass fibres and
phenolic resins with ecologically improved developments.

J. Bachmann et al.

programs. In the GRAIN project (GReener Aeronautics
International Networking), Chinese and European partners
identified possible research areas of mutual interest, such as
composites made from renewable materials and functionintegrated carbon fibre structural composites. The time is
now right for promoting the introduction of ecologically
favourable materials into the aviation sector with the help
of the ECO-COMPASS EU-China project.
ECO-COMPASS stands for ‘‘Ecological and Multifunctional Composites for Application in Aircraft Interior
and Secondary Structures’’. It is a Horizon 2020 research
and innovation action (RIA) project with overall 19 partners from Europe (8) and China (11). The Chinese partners
receive funding from the Chinese Ministry of Industry and
Information Technology (MIIT). The main objective of the
project ECO-COMPASS is to develop and assess ecologically improved and multifunctional composites for application in the aviation sector. Therefore, it will bundle the
knowledge of research from participants in China and
Europe to develop ecologically improved materials for
their application in aviation structures with a better ecological balance than materials currently used.
The application of renewable materials especially in both
aircraft secondary structures and interiors is a very ambitious
objective due to the stringent requirements. However, the
impact of the results could reach much further than aerospace
industry with its challenging requirements to ensure the
safety of the passengers. Ecological composites that are
improved regarding their mechanical, multifunctional and
ageing properties are also very interesting for other transportation industries such as automotive, train and marine.
Furthermore, other sectors such as wind energy and recreational equipment could profit from the results.
Ecologically improved does not necessary mean that
only bio-based materials will be evaluated. Recycled
materials and technologies to enhance the multifunctional
aspects of composites have to be investigated, too (Fig. 2).
For example a material protection technology that is needed in case of using bio-based fibres such as flax or ramie
for interior applications is an adapted fire protection. These
and other technologies could be combined and will be
evaluated for their use in the aerospace industry not only on
technical readiness level (TRL) but also on environmental
impacts compared to selected state of the art parts with an
accompanying life cycle assessment (LCA).

2 The eco-compass project
The European Union has a long history of enabling
research for aeronautical materials to increase the environmental performance of aircraft with projects such as
Clean Sky in Horizon 2020 and precursor framework

123

3 Application scenarios for eco-composites
in aviation
It must be distinguished between the identified applications:
secondary structures and interior. The requirements of those
applications differ considerably and, therefore, different ways

Outlook on ecologically improved composites for aviation interior and secondary structures

535

Fig. 2 Simplified circular flow diagram for ECO-COMPASS tasks

to meet these requirements are planned in ECO-COMPASS.
The focus for interior materials (Fig. 3) will be on the fire
properties (flammability, heat release, smoke and toxicity)
and multifunctional benefits that can be achieved by the use of
natural fibres, e.g. acoustic damping. On the other side, the
secondary structures have higher requirements regarding the
mechanical properties of the composite. The influence of
environmental impacts such as moisture, ultraviolet radiation
and lightning strike will be taken into account in ECOCOMPASS. Apart from secondary structures the Chinese
partners will evaluate an approach to enhance the conductivity
of composites by interlayers. This will also be applicable for
high performance CFRP used in primary structures.
Pure bio-composites made of bio-fibres (e.g. flax, ramie)
and bio-resin (e.g. epoxy) will be evaluated in parallel with

Fig. 3 Examples for interior sandwich parts

a new approach that aims to combine valuable recycled
carbon fibres and bio-fibres in a hybrid non-woven.
Together with natural fibre semi-finished products developed in China (woven, unidirectional reinforcements), this
will enable the aircraft engineer to select the right material
for the desired application. Fibre treatments to enhance the
mechanical properties and processability of natural fibres
will be proposed from partners in Europe (e.g. plasma
treatment) and China (e.g. nano-cellulose) with the aim to
improve the fibre-matrix adhesion which is crucial for best
properties of FRP. Furthermore, novel hybrid material
solutions for sandwich cores will be evaluated.
In parallel to the work on ecological reinforcement
fibres the development of bio-sourced resins as substitutions for the currently used bisphenol-A based epoxies and
phenolic resins will be carried out. On the Chinese side,
three different and promising bio-epoxy variants will be
optimized and evaluated for this task. As epoxy resin will
be mainly interesting for load-carrying applications the
European partners will in parallel evaluate the market situation on bio-based resins to replace the phenolic resin that
is used in the cabin environment today.
As the use of biological materials brings new challenges
such as moisture sensitivity and fungal attack, special attention will be paid to adapted protection technologies. Solutions
to mitigate these environmental influences will be identified
and tested, e.g. special coatings that do not influence the
mechanical behaviour of the composites. Furthermore, fibre
treatments (sizing) and resin additives such as effective nanoparticles to enhance these crucial properties will be assessed. It
will be of high importance in the project that these protection
technologies should only be applied if they are necessary to
fulfil their desired function as every further material and

123

536

treatment potentially increases the ecological footprint, cost
and weight. Therefore, an evaluation of the environmental
impact will be carried out not only by technical means but also
regarding their ecological impact with the help of a life cycle
assessment.
Life cycle assessment (LCA) is used as analysis tool to
evaluate how a product or material potentially affects
ecosystems. This should possibly include all life stages from
the start of production to the end-of life. The ISO framework
of LCA is standardized in the ISO 14040-14044 and defined
as ‘‘the collection and evaluation of the inputs, outputs and
the potential environmental impacts of a product system
throughout its life cycle’’. LCA allows the systematic
quantitative assessment in terms of environmental impact,
human health and resource consumption. Examples for
environmental impact categories are acidification potential,
global warming potential and human toxicity potential. Also
factors such as land-use, noise generation and loss of biodiversity should be included in a LCA.
To reduce the effort of certification tests, a numerical
simulation of the developed composites will be of high
value to assess the improvements and challenges of the
proposed materials. It is well known that the use of the
finite element method (FEM) allows for a significant
reduction of the required certification tests of structural
elements, components or full scale structures. Even though
this project is not accounting for high responsibility load
bearing components but mainly for secondary structures
and interior parts, the use of numerical tools will assist the
mechanical characterization of new materials stage and
consequently the associated cost. Structural, thermal as
well as electromagnetic numerical analysis will be performed and validated by the Chinese and European partners. Finally, when all numerical analyses are validated and
offer good agreement with experimental results they will
be used for the design optimization of new eco-composites.
A compromise between the required materials properties,
cost and ecological impact has to be found for every
application in a specific way. This means any eco-material
may be used on its own and does not necessarily need to be
combined with the other eco-materials but with state of the
art materials already used to achieve a positive effect. A
possible scenario is the use of bio-resins with standard manmade reinforcement fibres in applications where higher
mechanical properties are of importance or the environmental influence impedes the use of bio-sourced fibres.

4 Outlook for eco-materials
Current state-of-the-art materials in aircraft cabins are very
stiff and lightweight sandwich panels used for instance in
the ceilings, linings and hat racks. These sandwich panels

123

J. Bachmann et al.

contain a core made of aramid fibres and phenolic resin.
Glass fibres are used in combination with the phenolic resin
as prepreg-reinforcement for the top-layers of the sandwich
(Fig. 3). These very light and stiff panels are manufactured
in a heated press. No ecologically satisfactory end of life
treatment is available for such sandwich panels because of
the usage of phenolics and glass/aramid fibres. The separation of such heterogenous material combinations
embedded in a crosslinked thermoset resin is very complex
[2, 3].
The secondary structural parts require materials with
higher mechanical properties. Because of weight and
mechanical requirements, continuous carbon fibres are
mainly used for such parts. To protect the electromagnetic
interference and particularly the lightning strike, electrical
conductive structural composites are desired to use in the
critical zones of aircraft. The state-of-the-art carbon composites cannot satisfy the requirements. This is a big
technological challenge for the polymer matrix composites
[4–10].

4.1 Reinforcement fibres
A multitude of bio-fibres is available on the world market.
In Europe, flax and hemp fibres are the most common bastfibres used to reinforce composites. Ramie fibres that are
grown in China are another suitable candidate. A drawback
of natural fibre reinforced plastics (NFRP) is their lack of
strength compared to glass and carbon fibre reinforced
plastics (GFRP, CFRP). In theory, natural fibres can reach
very high values for tensile strength of up to 1000 MPa but
due to imperfections (kink bands) and incompatibilities to
certain resin systems their potential cannot be fully used
[2, 10]. The poor interfacial bonding properties between
hydrophilic natural fibres and hydrophobic polymers lead
to low mechanical properties of NFRP. Therefore,
improving the interfacial strength and toughness is necessary in order to improve facilitate their full potential. On
the other side, the low density of bio-fibres leads to good
specific stiffness values comparable to GFRP with further
advantages on acoustic and thermal damping due to their
hollow structure, the lumen (Fig. 4) [11].
Based on previous successful research experiences on
using chemicals and CNTs to improve the interfacial
properties of NFRP, the application of nano-natural cellulose to modify the interfacial and interlaminar properties of
the composites will be investigated [12]. In a Chinese
study, zirconia nanoparticles (ZrO2) were designed and
grafted onto flax fibres by hydrogen bonds as seen in Fig. 5
[13]. The results are an increased tensile strength of the
grafted flax fibres while the tensile modulus is not affected.
Another positive effect of ZrO2 grafted fibres is the

Outlook on ecologically improved composites for aviation interior and secondary structures

Fig. 4 Cross section of a ramie fibre [11]

reduced grow of fungal colonies on flax fibre reinforced
epoxy composites.
Another topic of ECO-COMPASS is the evaluation of
recycled carbon fibres (rCF). New carbon fibres are very
expensive due to their energy intensive production process.
It is, therefore, of high importance to reuse these valuable
fibres in order to save energy, raw materials and cost.
Pyrolysis of CFRP is a process that has made it into
industrial use recently to regain carbon fibres from composite waste. These recycled carbon fibres (rCF) are
available in milled and chopped form. The restricted length
and the removal of the fibre sizing are their main

Fig. 5 Nano particle aggregation on a flax fibre [13]

537

drawbacks compared to virgin carbon fibres (vCF) [14, 15].
It is, therefore, at the moment not possible to give these
‘‘downcycled’’ fibres the same function as virgin carbon
fibres.
In parallel to classic reinforcement types used in aviation, the combination of renewable bio-fibres and recycled
carbon fibres in a hybrid non-woven will be evaluated as an
alternative way to find applications for a rising amount of
recycled carbon fibres (Fig. 6). Recycled carbon fibres
have short and variable length which makes it very difficult
to convert them into continuous yarns for traditional woven
reinforcements. Non-woven processes are capable of
combining different types of fibres of variable length in a
single web structure for composite production. Nonwoven
processes are also less expensive and more eco efficient
compared to classic woven fabrics from bio-fibres due to
their simpler production process [3]. Renewable bio-fibres
such as flax and PLA have been successfully combined to
produce bio-degradable nonwoven composites [16–18].
The combination of recycled carbon fibres with bio-fibres
could enable the designer to optimize multifunctional ecoefficient composites using their inherent advantages.

4.2 Bio-based polymeric resins
Today, thermosets are the most important polymer family
used in the aviation industry [19], due to their versatility,
high performance and the wide span of applications they
comprise. Mainly phenolic and epoxy resins are used for
the interior panels and secondary structures of aircraft
[20, 21]. However, their petrochemical base and the difficulty of thermosets to be recycled, forces the industry to
seek for feasible alternatives that can reduce the ecological
footprint associated to their production [21].
In ECO-COMPASS, promising bio-based resins will be
assessed for their use in aerospace applications. Thermosetting epoxies from rosin, itaconic and gallic acid
(Fig. 7) have been identified as candidates from China, due
to their aliphatic-cyclic structure which can outperform
existing solutions in terms of mechanical properties and
chemical resistance [22–24]. Other bio-based resins show
very promising fire properties comparable to phenolic
resins. As an example, Fig. 8 shows the results of
flammability tests with glass and bio-fibre reinforced

Fig. 6 Combination of flax fibres and recycled carbon fibres in a
hybrid non-woven

123

538

composites. The burn length is the distance of damaged
area to specimen edge due to the combustion during the
flammability test. Selected (at least partly) bio-based resins
[epoxy (EP), furfuryl alcohol based resin (FUR) and linseed acrylate resin (ACR)] have been compared to phenolic
resin (PF) as reference. The furfuryl alcohol based resin
shows results in the range of the phenolic reference when it
is reinforced with glass fibres. Furthermore, the need for
flame retardants in case of using bio-sourced fibres is
clearly visible as none of the specimens reinforced with
flax fibres passed the test with the threshold of a maximal
burn length of 152 mm [2].
The incorporation of additives within the resins will be
analysed to enhance the performance of neat resins and
subsequent composite manufacturing. With this purpose,
application of carbon based additives such as graphene,
graphene oxide [25] or CNT [26], as well as silicon carbide
nanoparticles (nanotubes or nanowhiskers) could be highly
efficient in terms of thermal conductivity enhancement
[27–29], along with electric conductivity [30] and
enhancement of mechanical properties [31, 32]. Furthermore, specific coupling agents will be employed to enhance
Fig. 7 Chemical structures of
rosin-based curing agents MMP
and MPA and petroleum-based
curing agents CHDB and BTCA
[24]

Fig. 8 Burn length of glass and
bio-fibre reinforced composites
[2]

123

J. Bachmann et al.

the compatibility with additives and fibres. On the other
hand, fire resistance properties will be enhanced by means
of nanotechnology and innovative halogen-free phosphorous based reactive fire retardant additives, covalently
linked to the neat resin [33].

4.3 Composite manufacturing
The final composite material properties are related to the
control of the processing parameters during the manufacturing. The choices of the appropriate pressure, temperature and curing time are matter of importance to obtain low
porosity contents and an important extend of cure.
As different bio based materials will be considered in the
ECO-COMPASS project, a physico chemical characterization campaign will be done to identify the polymerization
kinetics and the rheological behaviour of the materials to be
transformed. These tests, which will also be carried out on
formulations with fillers for multifunctional properties
enhancement, will allow the identification of the most suitable process windows to guarantee the best compromise
between high material properties, and limited curing cycle

Outlook on ecologically improved composites for aviation interior and secondary structures

time. As bio based materials are usually very sensitive to the
environment and show bigger deviation standards on properties than ‘‘non bio-based’’ materials, such definition of the
curing cycles parameters are critically important to maximize the process reliability and to increase the repeatability
of the final properties of the materials manufactured.
Then, composite laminates and sandwich composites will
be manufactured by autoclave and hot press. Thanks to resin
and fiber formulations with fillers, an enhancement of the
material performances is targeted, such as structural and
mechanical properties, structural damping, fire/smoke/toxicity and hygrothermal ageing properties. Samples lay ups and
dimensions will be chosen according to aeronautical specifications and standards, and material health will be preliminary
controlled by ultrasonic testing before characterization.
Material protection will also be evaluated to improve the
durability of the material manufactured regarding environmental attacks and fire smoke and toxicity properties, but will
require a study of the compatibility of the material with these
solutions. For the different applications (secondary structures
and interior parts), a special attention will be paid to the total
weight increase induced by the material protections, which
will be parameter for the choice of the coating. Of course,
synergies between the different requirements will be looked
for between the different solutions evaluated.

4.4 Modelling and simulation
The objective of ECO-COMPASS research is to design,
improve and optimize the eco-composites to be used in an
efficient way in (semi-)structural parts. The mechanical–
numerical proposal for such purpose consists of an

539

investigation addressed to obtain good mechanical properties, durable, and resistant eco-composites based on
rational analysis that provides by the adaptation of generalized mixing theory and/or multiple scale homogenization
theory [34–36], derived from the formulations for the
classical composite material, and all these mechanical
formulations within a framework provided by the genetic
algorithms optimization [37, 38]. So, the proposed procedure promises a detailed behaviour study of the whole
composite, starting from each one’s simple component
behaviour. It seeks to obtain sustainable materials which
are also mechanically and thermally efficient.
Multiscale procedures are based in analysing a material
model (micro-model), assuming a periodic distribution of
the material within the structure. This analysis provides the
material response, which can be used in a structural model
(macro-model) to obtain the global performance of the
structure. There are several approaches in which a multiscale procedure can be defined. The generalized theory of
mixtures or serial/parallel mixing theory [34, 39] proposes
a phenomenological homogenization in which the composite performance is obtained from the constitutive
models of its components and some closing equations that
define how these components interact among them. This
formulation is capable of accounting for complex failure
procedures such as delaminations, with an affordable
computational cost [40, 41].
The other multiscale approach that will be used consists
in obtaining the composite performance from the analysis
of a numerical model of a representative volume element
(RVE). The boundary conditions to be applied at the RVE
come from the macro-model and the response obtained

Fig. 9 Stresses in the macro and micro models of a clamped pultruded composite beam [40]

123

540

from the RVE is transferred to the structural model. An
example on how a multiscale analysis works is shown in
Fig. 9, in which are plotted the stresses obtained in the
macro and micro scales for a clamped beam made with a
pultrusion composite. As it is shown by Otero et al. in [42]
the main drawback of this approach is its computational
cost. For this reason, ECO-COMPASS project will look
into two different strategies to reduce it. One consists of
defining a comparison parameter capable of predicting if a
given material point might have reached its threshold
stress–strain state. His approach has been formulated in
[43] and has shown an excellent performance. The second
approach consists of analysing the failure of RVE under
different stress–strain states to create a material database
defining the failure threshold and its evolution. This
approach requires an initial computational effort to define
the database but, afterwards, the structural simulation can
be conducted quite easily.
All formulations developed to analyse composite
structures require, also of accurate material models to
characterize the constituent materials. The working group
involved in ECO-COMPASS will use advanced constitutive models for the materials [44, 45], together with
specific formulations to account for large anisotropy
behaviour [46], or plastic mechanical damage and moisture
content [47]. The optimal material design [37, 38] in terms
of the structure and its uses depending on the climatic

Fig. 10 Examples of materials
and technologies under
investigation in ECOCOMPASS

123

J. Bachmann et al.

conditions of the place also will be considered through
thermal treatment of conduction and diffusion.
The use of virtual design and optimization models that
will be developed in ECO-COMPASS will reduce the
development time and cost of multifunctional eco-composites by reducing the number of manufacturing trials and
experiments. Investigation is carried out on the understanding of material parameters and processing factors affecting
the mechanical, thermal and electrical properties of biopolymer nanocomposites as well as the electromagnetic
shielding properties and lightning strike behaviour of ecocomposites using numerical [48–51] and/or analytical
models. The material parameters considered are the nanofiller dimensions, the nanofiller configuration, the properties
of the nanofiller/matrix interphase and the properties of the
bio-polymer and fibres. The processing factors considered
are the nanofiller volume fraction and the formation of
agglomerates of nanofillers. The investigation is conducted
by means of representative unit cells (RUCs) of nanofiller
agglomerates developed using the DIGIMAT software. The
RUCs are solved numerically using the finite element
method and analytically using the Mori–Tanaka method. At
the same time, homogenization of the RUCs is applied
through the use of periodic boundary conditions. The models
will receive input from microscopy images (SEM, AFM,
etc.) and will be validated against mechanical, thermal,
electrical, EMI and lightning strike tests.

Outlook on ecologically improved composites for aviation interior and secondary structures

5 Conclusions
Lightweight structures made from composite materials
have excellent mechanical properties combined with relatively low weight. These high-performance composites
used today in aviation are mainly based on man-made
components such as carbon fibres. Bio-sourced materials
such as flax fibres offer very promising characteristics but
have not found their way into aviation, yet. The project
ECO-COMPASS aims to bundle the knowledge of research
in China and Europe to develop ecologically improved
composites for the use in aircraft secondary structures and
interior. Therefore, bio-based/recycled reinforcements,
resins and sandwich cores will be assessed and optimized
for their application in aviation (Fig. 10). To withstand the
special stresses in aviation environment, protection technologies to mitigate the risks of fire, lightning and moisture
uptake will be investigated while an adapted modelling and
simulation will enable the optimization of the composite
design. Electrical conductive composites for electromagnetic interference shielding and lightning strike protection
will be investigated as well to improve the overall properties of high-performance composites. A cradle to grave
life cycle assessment (LCA) will be carried in parallel to
compare the eco-composites with state-of-the-art materials.
Acknowledgements This project was supported by the European
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (Grant no.
690638), and the Ministry for Industry and Information of the People’s Republic of China (Grant no. [2016]92).
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creative
commons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a
link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were
made.

References
1. Airbus technical magazine (2013)
2. Bachmann, J. and Fischer, H.: Bioharze und flammgeschützte
Naturfasern: Nachhaltige Materialien für das Flugzeuginterieur?
2. AVK-Fachtagung ,,Flammschutz bei Composites-Anwendungen‘‘. 10. Dez. 2013, Frankfurt (Main), Germany (2013)
3. Bachmann, J. and Michelis, B.: Verbesserung der Brandeigenschaften von NFK im Hinblick auf den Luftfahrt-Kabineneinsatz.
Hanser Industrietag: Naturfaserverstärkte und andere innovative
Verbundstoffe, 28. - 29.06.2011, Köln, Germany (2001)
4. Chen, C.Z., Li, Y., Yu, T.: Interlaminar toughening in flax fiberreinforced composites interleaved with carbon nanotube buckypaper. J. Reinf. Plast. Compos. 33(20), 1859–1868 (2014)
5. Li, Y., Chen, C.Z., Xu, J., Zhang, C.Z., Yuan, B.Y., Huang, B.Y.:
Improved mechanical properties of carbon nanotubes coated flax
fiber reinforced composites. J. Mater. Sci. 50(3), 1117–1128
(2015)

541

6. Shen, X., Jia, J.J., Chen, C.Z., Li, Y., Kim, J.K.: Enhancement of
mechanical properties of natural fiber composites via carbon
nanotube addition. J. Mater. Sci. 49(8), 3225–3233 (2014)
7. Yu, T., Ren, J., Li, S.M., Yuan, H., Li, Y.: Effect of fiber surfacetreatments on the properties of poly(lactic acid)/ramie composites. Compos. A 41, 499–505 (2010)
8. Li, Y., Hu, C.J., Yu, Y.H.: Interfacial studies of sisal fiber reinforced high density polyethylene (HDPE) composites. Compos.
A 39, 570–578 (2008)
9. Li, Y., Mai, Y.W.: Interfacial characteristics between sisal fiber
and polymeric matrices. J. Adhes. 82, 527–554 (2006)
10. Li, Y., Mai, Y.W., Ye, L.: Effects of fiber surface treatment on
the fracture-mechanical properties of sisal-fiber composites.
Compos. Interfaces 12(1), 141–163 (2005)
11. Bos, H.L.: The potential of flax fibres as reinforcement for
composite materials. Doctoral thesis, TU Eindhoven (2004)
12. Ajith, A., Xian, G., Li, H., Sherief, Z., Thomas, S.: Surface
grafting of flax fibres with hydrous zirconia nanoparticles and the
effects on the tensile and bonding properties. J. Compos. Mater.
50(5), 627–635 (2015)
13. Wang, H., Xian, G., Li, H.: Grafting of nano-TiO2 onto flax fibers
and the enhancement of the mechanical properties of the flax fiber
and flax fiber/epoxy composite. Compos. Part A Appl. Sci.
Manuf. 76, 172–180 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.composi
tesa.2015.05.027
14. Pimenta, S., Pinto, S.T.: Recycling carbon fibre reinforced
polymers for structural applications: technology review and
market outlook. Waste Manag. 31, 378–392 (2011)
15. Fischer, H., Schmid, H.G.: ,,Qualitätskontrolle für rezyklierte
Carbonfasern‘‘ (German, engl.: ,,Quality control for recycled
carbon fibres‘‘). Kunststoffe 11(2013), 88–91 (2013)
16. Alimuzzaman, S., Gong, R.H., Akonda, M.: 3D Nonwoven flax
fiber reinforced polylactic acid biocomposites. Polym. Compos.
35, 1244–1252 (2014)
17. Alimuzzaman, S., Gong, R.H., Akonda, M.: Biodegradability of
nonwoven flax fiber reinforced polylactic acid biocomposites.
Polym. Compos. 35, 1244–1252 (2014)
18. Alimuzzaman, S., Gong, R.H., Akonda, M.: Nonwoven polylactic
acid and flax biocomposites. Polym. Compos. 34, 1611–1619
(2013)
19. Cerruti, P., Avella, M., Errico, M.E., Malinconico, M. and Corvino, R.: New life for aircraft waste. Plast. Res. Online
20. Composites: materials of the future; Part 10: composites in
aeronautics.
http://www.pluscomposites.eu/sites/default/files/
Technical-articles-chapter10-EN.pdf. Accessed Oct 2016
21. Pickering, S.J.: Recycling technologies for thermoset composite
materials—current status. Compos. A 37, 1206–1215 (2006)
22. Auvergene, R., et al.: Biobased thermosetting epoxy: present and
future. Chem. Rev. 114(2), 1082–1115 (2014)
23. Liu, Q.Y., et al.: Preparation of a bio-based epoxy with comparable properties to those of petroleum-based counterparts.
Express Polym. Lett. 6(4), 293–298 (2012)
24. Li, C., et al.: Synthesis, characterization of a rosin-based epoxy
monomer and its comparison with a petroleum-based counterpart.
J. Macromol. Sci. Part A Pure Appl Chem 50(3), 321–329 (2013)
25. Tang, L., et al.: The effect of graphene dispersion on the
mechanical properties of graphene/epoxy composites. Carbon 60,
16–27 (2013)
26. Sánchez, M., et al.: Effect of the carbon nanotube functionalization on flexural properties of multiscale carbon fiber/epoxy
composites manufactured by VARIM. Compos. Part B Eng.
45(1), 1613–1619 (2013)
27. Yang, S., et al.: Effect of functionalized carbon nanotubes on the
thermal conductivity of epoxy composites. Carbon 48(3),
592–603 (2010)

123

542

J. Bachmann et al.

28. Naeimirad, M., Zadhoush, A., Neisiany, R.E.: Fabrication and
characterization of silicon carbide/epoxy nanocomposite using
silicon carbide nanowhisker and nanoparticle reinforcements.
J. Compos. Mater. 50(4), 435–446 (2015). https://doi.org/10.
1177/0021998315576378
29. Kavitha, N., Balasubramanian, M., Kennedy X.A.: Investigation
of impact behavior of epoxy reinforced with nanometer- and
micrometer-sized silicon carbide particles. J. Compos. Mater.
47(15),
1877–1884
(2012).
https://doi.org/10.1177/
0021998312451920
30. Choi, E.S., et al.: Enhancement of thermal and electrical properties of carbon nanotube polymer composites by magnetic field
processing. J. Appl. Phys. 94, 9 (2013)
31. Wang, X., et al.: Ultrastrong, stiff and multifunctional carbon
nanotube composites. Mater. Res. Lett. 1(1), 19–25 (2013)
32. Li, W., et al.: Carbon nanotube–graphene nanoplatelet hybrids as
high-performance multifunctional reinforcements in epoxy composites. Compos. Sci. Technol. 74, 221–227 (2013)
33. Albdiry, M.T., et al.: A critical review on the manufacturing
processes in relation to the properties of nanoclay/polymer
composites. J. Compos. Mater. 47(9), 1093–1115 (2013)
34. Rastellini, F., Oller, S., Salomón, O., Oñate, E.: Composite
material non-linear modelling for long fibre-reinforced laminates.
Continuum basis, computational aspects and validations. Comput.
Struct. 86, 879–896 (2008)
35. Oller, S.: Numerical simulation of mechanical behavior of composite materials. Springer, New York (2014)
36. Otero, F., Oller, S., Martinez, X.: Multiscale computational
homogenization: review and proposal of a new enhanced-firstorder method. Arch. Comput. Methods Eng. (2016). https://doi.
org/10.1007/s11831-016-9205-0
37. Lee, D.S., Morillo, G., Bugeda, G., Oller, S., Onate, E.: Multilayered composite structure design optimisation using distributed/parallel multi-objective evolutionary algorithms.
Compos. Struct. 94(3), 1087–1096 (2012)
38. Lee, D.S., Morillo, G., Bugeda, G., Oller, S., Onate, E.: Robust
design optimisation of advance hybrid (fiber–metal) composite
structures. Compos. Struct. 99, 181–192 (2013). (ISSN:
0263-8223)
39. Martinez, X., Oller, S.: Numerical simulation of matrix reinforced composite materials subjected to compression loads. Arch.
Comput. Methods Eng. 16(4), 357–397 (2009)

40. Martinez, X., Oller, S., Barbero, E.: Study of delamination in
composites by using the serial/parallel mixing theory and a
damage formulation. In: Camanho, P. (ed.) Chapter in mechanical response of composites, pp. 119–140. Springer, New York
(2008). (ISBN 978-1-4020-8583-3)
41. Martinez, X., Rastellini, F., Oller, S., Flores, F., Oñate, E.:
Computationally optimized formulation for the simulation of
composite materials and delamination failures. Compos. Part B
Eng. 42(2), 134–144 (2011)
42. Otero, F., Oller, S., Martinez, X., Salomón, O.: Numerical
homogenization for composite materials analysis. Comparison
with other micro mechanical formulations. Compos. Struct. 122,
405–416 (2015)
43. Otero, F., Martinez, X., Oller, S., Salomón, S.: An efficient multiscale method for non-linear analysis of composite structures.
Compos. Struct. 131, 707–719 (2015)
44. Oller, S.: Nonlinear dynamics of structures. CIMNE-Springer,
Barcelona (2014)
45. Martinez, X., Oller, S., Barbu, L.G., Barbat, A.H., de Jesus,
A.M.P.: Analysis of Ultra Low Cycle Fatigue problems with the
Barcelona plastic damage model and a new isotropic hardening
law. Int. J. Fatigue 73, 132–142 (2015)
46. Oller, S., Car, E., Lubliner, J.: Definition of a general implicit
orthotropic yield criterion. Comput. Methods Appl. Mech. Eng.
192(7–8), 895–912 (2003). (ISSN: 0045-7825)
47. Oller, S., Oñate, E.: A hygro-thermo-mechanical constitutive
model for multiphase composite materials. Int. J. Solids Struct.
33, 3179–3186 (1996)
48. Tserpes, K., Chanteli, A.: Parametric numerical evaluation of the
effective elastic properties of carbon nanotube-reinforced polymers. Compos. Struct. 99, 366–374 (2013)
49. Chanteli, A., Tserpes, K.: Finite element modeling of carbon
nanotube agglomerates in polymers. Compos. Struct. 132,
1141–1148 (2015)
50. Tserpes, K.I., Chanteli, A., Floros, I.S.: Prediction of yield
strength of MWCNT/PP nanocomposite considering the interphase and agglomeration. Compos. Struct. 168, 657–662 (2017).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compstruct.2017.02.042
51. Manta, A., Tserpes, K.: Numerical computation of electrical
conductivity of carbon nanotube-filled polymers. Compos. B Eng.
100, 240–246 (2016)

Afﬁliations
Jens Bachmann1 • Xiaosu Yi2 • Hugh Gong3 • Xavier Martinez4,5 • Gabriel Bugeda4,6 • Sergio Oller4,6 •
Konstantinos Tserpes7 • Eric Ramon8 • Christophe Paris9 • Pedro Moreira10 • Zhengping Fang11 •
Yan Li12 • Yanfeng Liu13 • Xiaoqing Liu14 • Guijun Xian15 • Jianfeng Tong16 • Jiahu Wei13 • Xufeng Zhang16
Jin Zhu14 • Songqi Ma14 • Tao Yu12
1

Institute of Composite Structures and Adaptive Systems,
DLR-Deutsches Zentrum für Luft- und Raumfahrt e.V.
(German Aerospace Centre), Brunswick, Germany

2

AVIC Composite Corporation Ltd. (ACC)/Beijing Institute of
Aeronautical Materials (BIAM), Beijing, China
School of Materials, University of Manchester, Manchester,
UK

3

4

Centre Internacional de Mètodes Numèrics a l’Enginyeria
(CIMNE), Barcelona, Spain

123

•

5

Department of Nautical Science and Engineering, UPC,
Barcelona, Spain

6

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, UPC,
Barcelona, Spain

7

Laboratory of Technology and Strength of Materials,
University of Patras, Patras, Greece

8

LEITAT Technological Center, Barcelona, Spain

9

Airbus Group Innovations, Suresnes, France

Outlook on ecologically improved composites for aviation interior and secondary structures

543

10

INEGI Institute of Science and Innovation in Mechanical and
Industrial Engineering, Porto, Portugal

14

Ningbo Institute of Materials and Engineering, CAS, Ningbo,
China

11

Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China

15

Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, China

12

Tongji University, Shanghai, China

16

ACC (Beijing) Sci. and Technol. Co. Ltd, Beijing, China

13

Beijing Institute of Aeronautical Materials, Beijing, China

123

