Cogn Tech Work (2015) 17:189–191
DOI 10.1007/s10111-014-0308-9

EDITORIAL

Introduction to the special section on managing system change
in aviation: What makes for successful change?
Siobhán Corrigan • Nick McDonald

Published online: 1 October 2014
 Springer-Verlag London 2014

Within the aviation industry, the need for sustainable
change is becoming more and more critical due to
increasing commercial pressure, upcoming regulations and
accelerating cycles of new technologies. But, whilst there
is wide acceptance that change is necessary, the evidence is
scant both in terms of empirical academic work and
industrial-based case studies. Addressing the very real
challenges industry has in implementing sustainable
change was the key focus of the MAnaging System Change
in Aviation (MASCA) project. MASCA was a three-year
FP7 collaborative project funded by the European Union
that finished in December 2013. The project was driven by
the following four industry change initiatives:
•
•

•

•

Case Study 1: Implementing Airport Collaborative
Decision-Making (A-CDM).
Case Study 2: The development and implementation of
a comprehensive Safety Management System (SMS) in
a major airline.
Case Study 3: The development and implementation of
a holistic performance management approach in a small
regional airport.
Case Study 4: The assessment of risk in advance of
major change in a regional airline.

This special section puts forward a new approach to
managing system change that has been tested and validated
in collaborative industrial research and practice by means
of the four case studies. The overall approach developed
within the MASCA project provided a way of understanding some of the complexities of change processes and
S. Corrigan (&)  N. McDonald
Centre for Innovative Human Systems (CIHS), School
of Psychology, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland
e-mail: siobhan.corrigan@tcd.ie

to support better design and evaluation of each of the
change initiatives. MASCA concluded with the following
succinct, high-level definition of what is required to change
an organisation:
At its most general, the capability of a resilient organisation has to encompass the following three characteristics:
To be able to mobilise its resources (especially its
knowledge and the information that supports this) to
anticipate future challenges, and to respond and adapt to
such challenges (whether they are fully foreseen or not).
In order to do this, it has to understand itself in two
ways:
•

•

how the system functions (how the interaction of
human, social and technical aspects makes it possible
to deliver value in the short, medium and long term);
and
what it is doing (how data from this activity are
converted to knowledge about how the system is
performing).

To have sufficient consensus to participate in and
support the effective leadership of change.
This definition applies (all other things being equal) to a
set of organisations functioning as an operational systemof-systems—as in aviation.
In order to support the development of this capability,
MASCA has developed (or incorporated) an integrated set
of services, methods and tools, which are summarised in
Fig. 1, below. These are Managing information, Analysing,
Serious gaming, Capability building and Achieving value
(MASCA).
Operational and management processes are the core of
the MASCA Change Management System; these should
deliver value in real time, in a way that is both sustainable

123

190

Cogn Tech Work (2015) 17:189–191

Fig. 1 Components of MASCA
Change Management System

and capable of change (Achieving Value). Knowledge of
these processes (the ‘know-how’ of how things really
work) is captured in process maps, analyses and evaluations (Analysing). Data generated by process activity are
gathered, integrated and assessed (Managing information).
Capability building is supported by mentoring through
external expertise; training is offered tailored to the needs
of the initiative and the phase it is in; high-level competence in managing change is provided by a Masters program. Serious gaming provides participants with the
opportunity to explore collaborative ways of working and
to experiment with different roles and scenarios.
A core theme throughout the project has been the
development of a theory or model of change that provides
both a robust basis for supporting change initiatives and a
coherent framework for evaluating their status and progress. The core proposition of the MASCA theoretical
framework is that understanding the functionality of a sociotechnical system is the key to managing it more effectively. It focuses on three interlocking and interdependent
levels of analysis: (1) process functionality (operational
and management processes); (2) social cohesion (team and
trust); and (3) collective knowledge and information
cycles. McDonald in his paper provides a comprehensive
description of the theory and a framework for the evaluation of the change initiatives that were undertaken as part
of the MASCA project, summarises and consolidates the
findings from the project case studies in terms of this
overall framework.
This is followed by four papers focusing on each of the
case studies identified above. Corrigan et al.’s paper provides a comprehensive and systematic evaluation into one

123

airport’s approach to preparing the ground work for full
implementation of A-CDM. One of the key challenges
centred around aligning goals of individual stakeholders
(e.g. Air Traffic Control, Airport Authority, Airlines and
Ground Handling) in order to facilitate the required level of
collaboration to ensure more timely decision-making.
Therefore, the evaluation highlighted the sections of social
relations and social cohesion (particularly for multi-agency
stakeholders), the right level of information and knowledge
processes (that will engage people and make future systems
work) and the capability of the new processes (both operational and management) to deliver the key strategic performance targets of A-CDM at the local airport levels and
to the wider European Air-Space.
Ulfvengren and Corrigan’s paper puts forward a conceptual framework for an integrated Safe-Lean programme
and an evaluation of one airline’s approach to developing
and implementing a SMS. A comprehensive set of Safety
Performance Indicators (SPI’s) was initiated as a way of
identifying and driving improvements. This involved
challenging demands to develop a common safety and risk
framework across different departments, to develop common performance management approaches between safety
and other goals and to link safety with lean change initiatives. Leva et al.’s paper reports on the challenges facing a
small regional airport in implementing a SMS. In this case
study, a holistic performance management approach was
developed supported primarily by the development of a
web-based tool that can support, monitor and analyse dayto-day performance activities and anomalies. A database
has also been designed to support the new SMS, which is
still in process of development. Subtasks pertaining to each

Cogn Tech Work (2015) 17:189–191

nonconformity are recorded in a dedicated Risk Register
and analysed during scheduled meetings attended by staff
and management in order to identify appropriate corrective
actions. This is part of a major strategy to create a more
business-oriented framework, which is critical to the
organisation’s survival.
The assessment of risk in advance of major change in a
regional airline is the focus of the paper by Cacciabue et al.
This case also focused on supporting the implementation of
an SMS and illustrated a flexible reactive response to
change imposed from outside by adapting conventional
risk assessment methodology to adjust the company’s
response to the impact of that change. The final paper in
this special section presents the overall learning process
that evolved during the MASCA project, specifically
focusing on one of the key elements of the overall learning
approach, the development of a Serious Game (SKYBOARD), and the role the game played in supporting the
implementation of A-CDM in a major European airport.
The underlying principles of the learning process were
based on ongoing and collaborative learning in the workplace, with each phase of learning involving preparation

191

and guidance, collaborative learning, consolidation of that
learning and practically focused next steps that can be
deployed to support overall change management.
Overall, these cases represent work in progress, both in
terms of practice and theory: the case studies continue as
they are not bounded by the project, and the theory has to
encompass this longitudinal dimension if it is ultimately to
understand what makes for change that is relatively successful or otherwise. Thus, what is presented here is a
cross-sectional snapshot of the different change initiatives
at the current stage. Future work will report on their
development and outcomes. What is presented in this
special section is a proposition that understanding the
internal dynamics of a sociotechnical system is one key to
understanding how that system can be transformed and
how that transformation can be supported. This in turn sets
the agenda for leadership, the exercise of power and the
role of culture. Thus, this work seeks to set a baseline upon
which to build an empirically grounded theory that can
provide practical support for more effective change
management.

123

