Adv. Manuf. (2013) 1:42–49
DOI 10.1007/s40436-013-0008-3

Making aviation green
Zuo-Ming Lin

Received: 14 June 2012 / Accepted: 8 October 2012 / Published online: 13 March 2013
Ó Shanghai University and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2013

Abstract With rapid economic progress and tremendous
advances of science and technology, awareness of environmental protection has become worldwide consensus. Saving
energy, reducing emission and dealing with climate changes
are global objectives. The aviation industry belongs to the
manufacturing industry. Air transportation is a major consumer of natural resources and energy. Development of
green technology in aviation manufacturing will have significant impacts on air transportation. On the basis of the
international situation, this article focuses on the current
development of green aviation manufacturing in China,
depicting AVIC’s objectives and commitments to achieving
this.

Green aviation comprehensively considers energy consuming and pollution emission in the entire product lifecycle. The fundamental goal is to achieve low energy
consumption, low emission and low pollution throughout the
whole process including design, testing and manufacturing.
These are essential for the balance of economic benefits,
social benefits and environmental benefits. The basic principle is to improve energy/resource efficiency of aviation
manufacturing and air transportation, and to create a clean
energy system. The core for achieving the goal is the technological innovation and change of the development
patterns.

Keywords Green aviation  Low carbon manufacturing 
Energy saving  Emission reduction

2 Current status of global green aviation

1 Introduction
The aviation industry, belonging to the manufacturing
industry, provides products for air transportation that is a
major consumer of natural resources and energy. Development of green technology in aviation manufacturing will
have significant impacts on air transportation. Under the
guidance of related policy-making, green aviation is leading
the future of aviation industry. To challenge the future,
aviation industry must become low-carbon and green
oriented.

Z.-M. Lin (&)
Aviation Industry Corporation of China, Beijing 100022,
People’s Republic of China
e-mail: gongzichu@sina.com

123

The global aviation manufacturing community is making
every effort to reduce emission and develop green aviation,
which involves research and development in various
technologies including aerodynamics, noise reduction,
more electricity, propulsion/combustion, green fuel, green
materials, and green manufacturing.
2.1 Active aerodynamics research
Aerodynamics is important not only in improving aircraft
performances and economy, but also in satisfying environmental requirements and promoting aircraft upgrade
[1]. Fuel consumption could be reduced for aircraft in
service by adopting state-of-the-art aerodynamic techniques to improve lift and reduce drag, thus decreasing fuel
cost, pollutants emission and noise.
Aerodynamic drag-reduction techniques being developed and/or applied are characterized by laminar flow
control, which is focused on new spoilers to reduce

Making aviation green

negative effects caused by vortex, large-size of wing tips,
self-adaptable flaps, new approach of wings laminar flow
control and active flow control. The target is to decrease
aerodynamic drag by 5 %–7 %, fuel consumption by 2 %,
and noise level by 2 dB [2] in near future.
Potential future aerodynamic configuration is well represented by blended wing body (BWB) aircraft developed
by NASA and Boeing, which can increase lift/drag ratio by
20 %, decrease fuel consumption by 27 %, and reduce
noise.
2.2 Noise reduction to meet environmental
requirements
Regarding noise pollution, the civil aviation authorities and
environmental organizations worldwide all adopt more
strict standards and requirements for air vehicles, especially civil airplanes. Noise control requirements are found
in the airworthiness regulations of many countries, e.g.,
FAR-36 of the United States and CCAR-36 of China.
Therefore, to apply for airworthiness certificates, all aircraft manufacturers must meet noise airworthiness standards. According to the EU roadmap, the airworthy noise
level of commercial airplanes has to be 10 dB with regard
to effective perceived noise lower than the stipulations in
2000 by 2020. This is to be achieved in three major areas:
noise reduction of engine and nacelle, and airframe noise
control.
2.3 Green propulsion/combustion technology
for emission reduction
Emissions from the aircraft are directly generated by the
engine. Improving engine performance and combustion
efficiency will have an immediate effect on reducing fuel
consumption and greenhouse emissions [3]. For conventional engine structure, specific fuel consumption can be
reduced through cycle parameter optimization, aerodynamic
improvement and design improvement of combustors. The
United States and European countries initiated various programs for developing efficient and environment-friendly
engine technologies [4]. They are working on GTF engines,
open rotor engines, more-electricity engines, pulse detonation engines and other new engine architectures. The basic
goal is to reduce fuel consumption by 8 %–20 %, noise by
6 dB–20 dB, NOx pollutants by 40 %–80 %, and operational cost by 15 %–30 %.
Green fuel technology focuses on finding new alternative
fuel to replace aviation fuel and achieve low energy consumption and low emission. It is expected that up to 25 % of
aviation fuel will be bio-fuel by 2025. That number will
reach 35 % in 2030, and 50 % in 2040 respectively.

43

2.4 More electricity technology for energy
consumption reduction
More electricity technology can enable overall management
of power utilization for airborne systems and integration of
equipment and thus reduces fuel consumption. This technology is critical both in improving aircraft performance and
reducing environmental footprint [5]. Several projects in the
US, the EU and other countries have achieved energy optimization through integration of electromechanical systems.
Electrical network is adopted to replace traditional centralized hydraulic, pneumatic and mechanical energy systems.
Electricity becomes the major source for secondary energy
so as to reduce secondary energy types, improve efficiency
and reliability, reduce fuel consumption, system weight, and
cost in manufacturing, maintenance and operation.
2.5 New generation flight management system
for greener operation
As an important technology that can reduce fuel consumption and flight intervals, increase operational capability of air
space, ensure flight safety and quality as well as ease pilots’
workload, the flight management system has experienced
five phases such as local navigation system, performance
management system, 3D & 4D flight management system to
a new generation flight management system since the 1960s.
With the development of computer technology, GPS, data
link communication and requirements change of CNS/ATM
operational environment, the real time dynamic management based on 4D track control which is evolved from flight
plan has become the core characteristics of new generation
flight management system. The performance-based navigation, space-sky-ground integrated network data link and 4D
leading technology based on optimized flight path have
become the key trend.
2.6 Green materials and manufacturing technology
become main research topics
Apart from optimization of propulsion system and overall
aerodynamic efficiency, advanced materials such as composite and Al–Li alloys are introduced to reduce aircraft
weight, thus reducing fuel consumption and engine emission
to certain extent. New green aviation coating products currently in use, e.g., metal pretreatment coating and epoxy
primer, are quite effective in corrosion prevention and do not
contain chromate [6]. Since they contains little volatile
organic compound, greenhouse gas emission can be effectively reduced.
With improved environmental standards for energy
saving, fuel consumption and emission reduction, green
manufacturing technologies become a major area for

123

44

research and development. Rapid shaping, precision forging and casting, and other near-net shaping techniques to
save raw materials are evolving rapidly. Research on
composite materials has been extended from design and
manufacturing to waste treatment. Airbus replaces chemical milling with skin mirror milling, a green transformation
of traditional ECM technology and perfect solution for the
recycling and disposing of electrolyte. Efficient NC
machining is widely applied in parts processing. With
improved awareness and intensive research that has been
done, green manufacturing has been applied to a wider
range of areas which involve the whole product lifecycle
and multiple lifecycles.
2.7 Information technology as a foundation for green
manufacturing
Various IT tools are adopted to promote green manufacturing such as PLM, ERP, SCM, and MRO. The application of these tools in operation and process management
helps the information management between suppliers,
manufacturers, retailers and customers, and supports
information sharing and decision-making. IT technologies
provide virtual environment in which all aspects of green
manufacturing could be simulated, shared and tracked and
therefore compatible to all stakeholders.
IT technologies not only function in aviation manufacturing, but also play significant role in smart cockpit and
paperless operation to reduce carbon footprint.

3 Green aviation manufacturing in China
Aviation Industry Corporation of China (AVIC) is a stateowned industrial group. It is involved in the design, testing
and manufacturing of civil airplanes, transporters, fighters,
trainers, helicopters, and general aircraft. A large number
of environmental issues are involved in the design, testing
and manufacturing of aircraft structures and systems. As a
major aviation manufacturer in China, AVIC pays high
attention to energy conservation and environmental protection. Great efforts have been made to improve the
energy saving, reduce energy consumption and pollution as
well as actively develop an environment-friendly industry
by using high technology in aviation.

Z.-M. Lin

emission reduction. IT technologies are widely applied to
create digitalized development system and support new
mode of production, so as to realize fly before
manufacturing.
3.1.1 Research on advanced aerodynamics
AVIC has signed the Greener Aeronautics International
Networking (GRAIN) with the EU. GRAIN is a SinoEuropean cooperative project in identifying and evaluating
new approaches to reduce pollution and noise, enhance lift
and decrease drag, developing new materials, and large-scale
simulation methods and tools supporting these technologies.
The program aims at meeting the strategic targets for environmental protection in the long-term development of aviation industry in China. Under this framework, Key Green
Technology Package II is focused on the lift enhancement
and drag reduction technologies, mainly airframe anti-drag
design and optimized aerodynamics. Specific technical
subjects include: laminar flow wings and boundary layer
control of laminar flow, optimization design of lift
enhancement and drag reduction, theory and application of
turbulent flow drag reduction, basic research on stability of
cross flow stationary wave in 3D boundary layer, engineering application of laminar flow wing design (see Fig. 1).
3.1.2 Continuous R&D of high-efficiency structure
AVIC has been carrying on with research on new design
methods, new materials, and new structures, which have
gradually reduced aircraft structure weight rate, greatly
increased service life and decreased fuel consumption. The
highlights are structure design and analysis technology,
composites technology, and integrated metal structure. The
improvement of structure design and analytical software,
and strength virtual test have greatly reduced the quantity
of test pieces and shortened test period. In terms of carbon
fiber reinforced composite, the application level is
increasing. The location has changed from non-bearing
force structure, sub-support structure to primary structure,

3.1 Status quo on green aviation development of AVIC
AVIC sticks to its strategy in developing green aviation
technology. Comprehensive research has been conducted
on aerodynamics, noise reduction, more electricity, green
power, green materials and green manufacturing [5]. Productive results have been obtained in energy saving and

123

Fig. 1 BWB configuration proposed by AVIC

Making aviation green

which forms comprehensive composite research, productivity and technical reserve. The overall panel structure has
been widely applied in aircraft structure. The new overall
structure study has been conducted in such fields as highspeed cutting, friction stir welding, electrical beam welding, and laser welding, which have formed relevant design
and process, guidelines, softwares, and databases.
3.1.3 Research on noise reduction for aircraft and engine
Main areas of research on noise reduction cover basic
studies of computational aerodynamic acoustics technology, aerodynamic noise and flow control techniques, and
engine nacelle noise reduction. Research work, such as
evaluation of part noise control and static noise test of parts
and overall engine, has been conducted. Engine noise
analytical software has been developed and database been
established accordingly. Main research subjects include
advanced methods for aircraft noise test, engine noise test
and control, theoretical modeling for annoyance of aircraft
noise, linearized Euler equation source term formulation,
parallel computation of a high-order discontinuous Galerkin method on unstructured grids, and reduction of engine
exhaust noise by micro-jet. By studying the influence of
control parameters of micro-jet systems on the sound
pressure level of aerodynamic noise from engine flow, the
generation mechanism of noise from engine exhaust has
been revealed and micro-jet noise control theory been
established. Findings in exhaust noise control have been
applied in the active control of noise for real engine design
(see Fig. 2).

45

3.1.4 Rapid progress of green power technology
Based on the experience in previous engines and fundamental research on aviation power technology, and required
by China’s large aircraft project, AVCI launched research on
low emission combustors for civil aircraft, with particular
focus on critical specifications for emission and noise control. Through verification test of pollution control technology on model combustors, fan shape combustors and annular
combustors, a database of low-emission combustors has
been built, and an integrated prediction model for lowemission combustors has been established to support the
overall engine design. It is expected to reduce emission by
50 % as compared to the present airworthiness standards. A
specialized civil engine company has been built, which
carries out product design and full-scale research to meet
airworthiness standards on one hand and to develop green,
safe, reliable and economic civil engines. Advanced research
has been launched in new engine development, including
multi-fan propulsion system, gear-driving turbofan engine,
intercooled recuperative aero-engine and other advanced
technologies for civil aviation (see Fig. 3).
3.1.5 Prospects for green more-electricity technology
Power system has achieved serial development in low
voltage DC power and DC start generator. In-depth
research has been launched on high power variable frequency AC power system for large commercial aircraft,
and on secondary power systems. Substantial breakthrough
has been accomplished in module design including SSPC,

Fig. 2 China’s numerical simulation of landing gear noise

123

46

Z.-M. Lin

breakthroughs and progress have been made in navigation,
route optimization and path control.
3.1.7 Achievements in green materials

Fig. 3 More-electricity engine

In terms of green material R&D, China also proposes its
advice on green material technology enhancement based on
the strategic demands on green aviation. Under the SinoEuropean cooperation framework, Key Green Technology
Package 4 focuses on green material technology. Main
research subjects include mechanical performance simulation, natural fiber, noise reduction material, material recycling, and simulation for high performance of materials (see
Fig. 5).
3.2 AVIC’s green manufacturing

Fig. 4 Centrifugal compressor driven by high speed DC motor

electric actuator, and electric environmental control (see
Fig. 4).
3.1.6 Development of flight management system
Driven by green aviation and the technological requirements
on larger civil aircraft and based on China Civil Aviation PBN
Roadmap, AVIC has been implementing in-depth research on
advanced meteorological radar technology, 4D navigation
technology, space/ground data link communication technology, performance optimization and prediction technology as
well as integrated information management technology. Key

Fig. 5 Application of plant fiber composite on aircraft

123

To develop low carbon economy, maintain scientific
development and transform China’s economic structure is
the general national roadmap. AVIC has the social
responsibility to align with the national strategy. To promote green aviation concept, maintain low carbon development, and optimize business model, AVIC is motivated
to contribute to the establishment of energy conserving and
environment friendly society.
Energy saving and emission reduction are key elements
in promoting green development of aviation manufacturing.
In the past years, strategic actions have been taken by AVIC
to promote energy conservation and emission reduction, an
implementation of the national plan. Old equipments with
high energy consumption and high emission have been
replaced or upgraded. Environmental evaluation report
mechanism is in place for any fix asset investment. The
design, construction and investment of environment facilities are started in parallel with the project. Strict requirements are applied to major subsidiaries to prevent big
environment events. Through continuous efforts, AVIC has
accomplished the energy saving and emission reduction
targets set by government 2 years in advance (see Fig. 6).

Making aviation green

47

Fig. 6 Numerical controlled electrochemical machining of engine blades and integral impeller

Apart from the energy saving methods of traditional
manufacturing, AVIC has put into huge investments and
manpower to develop advanced green manufacturing technology. From the point of view of saving raw material consumption, the advanced joining technology and additive
manufacturing level of friction stir welding, linear friction
welding and laser welding have been rapidly increased. Those
techniques are being widely utilized in the aircraft structure
manufacturing, thus greatly increasing the buy to fly ratio of
those expensive materials such as titanium alloy and superalloy. To meet the requirements on reducing pollutants
emission, phosphoric anodizing is used to replace sulfuric
acid anodizing, the highly polluted chemical milling replaced
by mechanical processing. Moreover, the pollutant processing technology of electrochemical machining has made significant breakthroughs. Since energy consumption reduction
is one of the important goals of green technology, AVIC has
developed resin transfer molding (RTM) and resin film
infusion (RFI) which can replace traditional autoclave
processing, thus reducing electricity greatly. These new
technologies are changing Chinese aviation industry fundamentally. With more investments in advanced manufacturing
from AVIC, advanced technologies will make the aviation
products affordable and the manufacturing process environmentally friendly.
Advanced information technology is widely used in
modern aviation industry to increase resources utilization
during the product design, manufacturing and application.
The development and manufacturing systems of aviation
products in AVIC are turning digitalized, network-oriented
and intelligent. Information technologies are adopted to
create digitalized development system to support new
mode of production and achieving fly-before-manufacturing. Through ERP system, the allocation and operation of
resources, logistics and capital could be supervised and
controlled in real time. AVIC is stepping towards a green
aviation company, using green concepts to guide its
activities throughout the product lifecycle. Virtual concept
design is replacing traditional physical prototyping. The
manufacturability of the product can be evaluated during
development phase so that economic and feasible

manufacturing processes could be designed in advance.
Simulation of assembly could identify coordination and
processing defects and thus achieve green manufacturing
through resources utilization improvement and energy
saving. Numerical technology can simulate product operation and maintenance environment so that the overall
environmental impact could be evaluated for the whole
product lifecycle. Mitigation measures can then be prepared, resources utilization improved (see Fig. 7).
3.3 Develop green aviation products
Turboprops consume less fuel compared to turbofan and
turbojet aircraft. They also produce less emissions of CO2,
CO, SO2, as compared to turbofan aircraft of the same
category. By using turboprops, significant economic
advantages can be achieved in energy saving, emission
reduction. In an air route of 500–600 km, the operating
cost per seat of turboprop aircraft is 35 % lower than that
of a turbojet. For less than 500 km routes, the number is
more than 40 %. Therefore turboprop aircraft is an ideal
choice for green aviation.
In 1990s, AVIC developed MA60 turboprop aircraft for
regional operation, an upgrade on China’s Y-7. Due to
excellent performance in economy, safety and comfort,
MA60 has won market recognition. With substantial
improvements and system upgrades according to high
international standards, the newly developed MA600 has
been certified by CACC and ready to be delivered. Targeting
the international market, AVIC launched the brand new
MA700 program. With a family products strategy, MA60,
MA600 and MA700, AVIC is going to become one of the
major suppliers for turboprop aircraft in the global market.

4 AVIC’s prospects for green aviation
Since the new century, the problems of global resources,
environment and climate have become more and more severe,
environment-friendly, energy-saving, low-carbon and environment protection, as well as green development have

123

48

Z.-M. Lin

Fig. 7 Coordinated development system of different locations to support green manufacturing

become the inevitable choice of human development. To
realize green development, AVIC will increase energy and
resources efficiency, reduce pollutants emissions, and
improve resource structure. It is AVIC’s internal requirements
of scientific development and social responsibility to develop
low-carbon economy and serve for national economy.

world-class turboprop commuter manufacturer. Low
emission engine—which will equip C-919—will make
AVIC among the most advanced engine manufacturers.

4.1 Promote green concept and speed up change
of development patterns

Technology is the key for industrial upgrade and the
foundation for green development. Green aviation development must be based on innovation and mastery of core
technologies. AVIC is committed to developing leadingedge technologies to support green development. To
strengthen innovative capabilities, break through core and
key technologies, AVIC is committed to a large investment
in research. Focused research areas include new materials,
new structure, new dynamic configuration, new design
technology, new manufacturing technology, new engine
technology, green more-electricity technology, and information technology. The goal is to continuously reduce
emission, noise, weight and fuel consumption.

Green aviation will be regarded as one of the most
important concepts of AVIC at the strategic level, which is
penetrated into every element of our business including
operation, product design, manufacturing, and marketing.
Important actions are being taken to promote strategic
planning and structural optimization. To greatly promote
the capability of using intangible competitiveness to create
values as well as reduce resources consumption and environment pollution, AVIC will actively foster core competitiveness of brand values, commercial modes and
integrated network. This will encourage effective growth,
avoid resource and capital occupancy and energy consumption, and reduce environmental impacts.
4.2 Develop advanced commercial aircraft and green
aviation
AVIC is committed to developing advanced economical
civil aviation products of low carbon impact for domestic
and global markets, focusing on serial development of
turboprop aircraft, civil helicopters and general aircraft.
The MA turboprop family has become an established brand
in the regional market. MA700—new turboprop commuter—is under development. AVIC is trying to be a

123

4.3 Scientific and technological innovation lays solid
foundation for green development

4.4 Energy saving, emission reduction and green
manufacturing
In accordance with the state requirements, AVIC sticks to
its energy conservation and emission reduction targets. It
will continually promote resource recycling and regeneration, maintaining as an energy saving and environment
friendly corporation. Actions will be taken as follows:
(i)

Set up mechanism for energy conservation and
emission reduction; implement statistics, testing and
evaluation systems; strengthen the supervision
management of statistic reporting; build monitoring

Making aviation green

(ii)

(iii)

networks; implement target assessment and make
environment performance evaluation part of business
performance evaluation; set up benchmarking and
evaluation standards for major energy consuming
subsidiaries
Upgrade facility. AVIC will invest more in the
replacement and upgrade of old facilities with high
energy consumption and emission, remove redundant
capacity
Evaluate environmental impacts of construction
projects and promote energy saving evaluation and
investigation systems; ensure a parallel launch of
environment project with the main project

5 Conclusions
In the era of low-carbon economy, AVIC faces both challenges and opportunities. It is AVIC’s missions to pursue
green aviation, speed up change, enhance technology innovation, and strengthen the foundation for green development; it is AVIC’s opportunities to develop new energy and
integrate into the supply chain. AVIC is also committed to
developing green and strong aviation industry and

49

contributing to the establishment of resource-saving and
environmentally friendly society in China.

References
1. Kare K, Wim D, Michael O et al (2012) Methodology for
systematic analysis and improvement of manufacturing unit
process lifecycle inventory (UPLCI)CO2PE initiative (cooperative
effort on process emissions in manufacturing). Int J Cycle Assess
17:69–78
2. Tridech S, Cheng K (2008) Low carbon manufacturing: characterization, theoretical models and implementation. In: The 6th
International Conference on Manufacturing Research, Brunel
University, 9–11 September 2008
3. Tridech S, Cheng K (2010) An investigation of the ERFE-based
low carbon manufacturing on CNC machine. In: Proceeding of the
36th International MATADOR Conference, Manchester, 14 –16
July 2010
4. Ball PD, Evans S, Levers A et al (2009) Zero carbon manufacturing facility-towards integrating material, energy, and waste
process flows. J Eng Manuf 223(9):1085–1096
5. Ameta G, Mani M, Rachuri S et al (2009) Carbon weight analysis
for machining operation and allocation for redesign. Int J Sustain
Eng 2(4):241–251
6. Song JS, Lee KM (2010) Development of a low-carbon product
design system based on embedded GHG emissions. Resour
Conserv Recycl 54(9):547–556

123

