Sustain Sci (2013) 8:87–101
DOI 10.1007/s11625-012-0187-z

ORIGINAL ARTICLE

Multi-level perspectives with technology readiness measures
for aviation innovation
Hiroko Nakamura • Yuya Kajikawa
Shinji Suzuki

•

Received: 24 May 2011 / Accepted: 23 August 2012 / Published online: 15 September 2012
 Springer 2012

Abstract Sustainability science requires the development
of a theoretical framework to understand, analyze, and design
innovation to solve social, economic, and environmental
issues. This paper extends the framework of multi-level
perspectives (MLP) by introducing a technology readiness
level (TRL), and analyzes the innovation of the advanced
turboprop (ATP) engine in the aviation industry, also known
as a propfan or an open rotor engine, which is one of the most
promising engine innovations expected to mitigate climate
change. The concept of TRL was introduced to explain the
mechanisms of ATP failure in the late 1980s as well as the
transition of the geared turbofan (GTF). In this paper, we
discuss why ATP and GTF faced different fates although both
were developed under the same landscape in the aviation
industry. We also discuss the different roles of the sociotechnical regime, such as uneven and dynamic opportunity
windows, technological readiness, niche stock, institutional

Handled by Peter Marcotullio, Hunter College, USA.
H. Nakamura (&)  S. Suzuki
Center for Aviation Innovation Research,
The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8656, Japan
e-mail: techhn@mail.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp
Y. Kajikawa
Institute of Engineering Innovation,
Graduate School of Engineering,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan
Y. Kajikawa
Graduate School of Innovation Management,
Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan
S. Suzuki
Department of Aeronautics and Astronautics,
School of Engineering, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan

support of export products, and the risk of a ‘launch’ customer, at different TRLs. As illustrated in this paper, MLP
with TRL is expected to facilitate future interdisciplinary
collaboration between social scientists and engineers, and
also transdisciplinary expertise between academia and practitioners by supporting analysis and design of the industry’s
transition toward a more environmentally friendly regime as
well as its effective management.
Keywords Multi-level perspective  Strategic niche
management  Technology readiness level  Transition path 
Innovation  Advanced turboprop  Open rotor  Propfan

Introduction
The term ‘sustainability’ spread widely after the United
Nations Conference on the Environment and Development
(UNCED), also known as the Earth Summit, in Rio de Janeiro,
in June 1992. Innovation for sustainability is a challenging
issue in both industry and academia. In the academic area,
researchers from a variety of disciplines have begun to join
sustainability science and interdisciplinary research with
transdisciplinary expertise and are expected to offer an
effective way to explore the root causes of issues relating to
sustainability and design as well as to offer plausible solutions
for society to realize sustainability (Kajikawa 2008). However, the movement toward sustainability has not proceeded at
a quick pace. Many innovative technologies for sustainability
are being invented or are under active investigation, but most
are not competitive enough against conventional technologies
and do not become dominant. Such new and immature technologies are often very expensive, have little compatibility
with existing regulations, or, find difficulty being accepted
by conservative societies or markets. Therefore, scientific

123

88

inquiry and a systematic framework to comprehend the evolutionary process of invention, innovation, and diffusion are
necessary (Jaffe et al. 2002). But factors affecting the process
are obscure, while a number of techniques to mimic diffusion
processes with an S-curve are well studied (Geroski 2000).
Sustainability science requires the development of a theoretical framework to understand, analyze, and design how new
technological, economic, and social systems interact and
co-evolve with various factors of socio-technical regimes in
the context of sustainability.
To understand the transition process toward sustainability,
we must understand interactions among stakeholders with
different normative structures and incentives, which are
embedded in, influenced by, and exploited in innovation
systems (Geels 2010). The socio-technical regimes in innovation systems have a dominant role in accelerating but also
obstructing niche technology in its progress from invention to
innovation (Kemp et al. 2001; Smith 2006). Transformation
of the socio-technical regimes can work as a tipping point in
the evolutionary process of innovation.
Literature about multi-level perspectives (MLP) has
emerged and has been developed intensively for two decades, by trying to model innovation based on evolutionary
transition. MLP is a simple, but flexible, framework to
comprehend dynamic innovation. The MLP approach has
attracted enormous academic attention in science, technology and innovation studies fields (Kern 2012). The nature of
this framework is multi- and inter-disciplinary and requires a
repertoire of empirical and theoretical approaches both
application and generalization (Grin et al. 2010). This paper
analyzes empirically the uncompleted transition path of the
advanced turboprop (ATP)1 in the aviation industry through
1

In this paper, ATP is defined as an innovative turbofan engine with
a fan uncovered by a duct, and propfan, unducted fan (UDF) and open
rotor are all included in this term. The original engineering concept of
ATP was an innovation from a turboprop, aimed at bringing the speed
of a fuel-efficient turboprop to a competitive level with the turbofan
engine. NASA first developed a single rotation tractor ATP system in
the ATP project at the Aircraft Energy Efficiency Program (ACEE)
launched in the late 1970s. When NASA’s investigated passengers’
acceptance of ATP technology with United Airlines in the late 1970s,
the term ‘‘propfan’’ was used in order to avoid passengers conjuring
up images of the old troublesome propeller from the term of turbo‘‘prop’’. In the early 1980s, General Electric (GE) revealed the
concept of the UDF, i.e., a dual rotation pusher system with neither a
gearbox nor a duct. The engineering concept of dual rotation systems
without a duct such as GE’s UDF or DX-578 was rather an innovation
from a turbofan, aimed at bringing the fuel-efficiency of a turbofan to
a competitive level with the turboprop engine. (DX-578 was with
reduction-gear and developed by Pratt, Whitney and Allison, who
originally developed a single rotation ATP at NASA’s ATP project.)
NASA’s original ATP and UDF might be different in the strict in
terms of the engineering concept but are same in the purpose to
achieve the best features of turboprop and turbofan. A brief
explanation of turboprop and turbofan will appear in the ‘‘Scope
and methodology’’ section. A dual rotation system has recently been
called an open rotor.

123

Sustain Sci (2013) 8:87–101

MLP and then extends the theoretical approach of MLP by
introducing the concept of a technology readiness level
(TRL). How socio-technical regimes affect the transition
process at different TRLs is also discussed in this research.
This paper is organized as follows: The next section
reviews the previous literature and discusses the theoretical
background to this paper. The ‘‘Scope and methodology’’
section explains the scope and approach used in this paper.
The ‘‘Analysis’’ section analyzes an innovation path of
ATP that is expected to appear in the aviation industry in
the near future within the MLP framework. This section
also introduces TRL into MLP framework and explores the
transition process of the geared turbofan (GTF), which was
derived from a core technology developed in ATP projects,
to understand the promising innovation path of GTF in
contrast with other ATP technologies. The ‘‘Discussion’’
section, discusses the different roles of socio-technical
regimes at different TRLs. The final section concludes this
paper with our findings.

Literature review
Modeling innovation
In the 1980s, many firms faced the need to manage globalized and increased competition, but these firms showed
innovation not in R&D strategy, but in the strategy of the
company (Van Lente 1997). In the same period, many
innovation researchers criticized past literature for overemphasizing the technological aspects of a system and
claimed broader views were necessary to see the whole
picture. For example, in science and technology studies,
Linstone (1999) claimed that past science and technology
literature studied ‘‘a system in terms of a very limited
number of elements (or variables) and the interactions
among them’’ so that the set of subsystems studied in such
a manner would not represent the characteristics of the
entire system. He proposed organizational and individual
perspectives in addition to traditional technological perspectives used in the technology assessment process.
In economic studies, evolutionary theories were introduced to model innovation in the disequilibrium dynamics
observed in the process of economic growth driven by
technological change (e.g., Nelson and Winter 1977; Dosi
1982; Freeman 1974). Evolutionary economics developed
the concept of socio-technological regime that is the sociotechnical mainstream and creates stability, and disseminated the importance for the regime of cognitive rules,
routines and corporation with a comprehensive perspective
that is beyond the firm or sectoral level (Weber et al. 1999;
Kemp et al. 1998; Raven 2006; Geels 2006b; Verbong and
Geels 2007; Jones and Miller 2007; Grin et al. 2010).

Sustain Sci (2013) 8:87–101

Diffusion of innovation, which is the ‘‘selection’’ stage
in the evolutionary process, is a vitally important dimension of the transition between different regimes (Metcalfe
1981), and many researchers were challenged to measure
the speed of diffusion. However, Brown (1981) criticized
past diffusion research as overemphasizing demand and
modeled the diffusion research with adopters having equal
opportunity. Brown also emphasized the importance of
considering socio-economic conditions such as the existence and type of infrastructures that support the diffusion
of innovation. In recent studies of diffusion of innovation,
user acceptance (Venkatesh et al. 2003), knowledge and
capability (Attewell 1992), culture (Straub 1994), network
(Abrahamson and Rosenkopf 1997), demand factors
and conditions (Popp et al. 2011), market competition
(Chrysovalantou and Petrakis 2011), international trade
barriers (Eaton and Kortum 2006), strategic and psychological factors (Abrahamson and Rosenkopf 1993), and
organizational structure (Abrahamson 1991) are investigated and analyzed as important factors controlling adaptation and the diffusion process of innovation.
While research on diffusion of innovation focuses on the
‘‘selection’’ stage in the evolutionary process, research on
strategic niche management (SNM) studies the development processes of an emerging innovation system (i.e., a
niche), which is vulnerable in its infancy. Previous research
of SNM has emphasized the necessity for a protected
experimental space with strategic factors such as broad and
deep social networks, robust expectations shared between
actors of the niche, and learning processes at multiple
stages where the actors related to the niche learn about the
design, user needs, cultural and political acceptability, and
other aspects of the niche (Hoogma et al. 2002). Case
studies of SNM can be seen in various domains, for
example, products such as organic food and eco-efficient
houses, public services such as biogas energy plants and
wastewater plants, and even policies such as road access
charges (e.g., Smith 2007; Raven and Geels 2010; Hegger
et al. 2007; Ieromonachou et al. 2004).
MLP framework
MLP has been developed as a model to grasp technical
change by synthesizing the factors affecting innovation
process. MLP introduced the idea of a ‘‘landscape’’—the
macro-level and historical momentum of society as a
whole—to past studies on socio-technical regimes (Grin
et al. 2010). MLP emphasizes the importance of interaction
with externalities for niche development. Specifically,
MLP explores the innovation process of three levels (and
interactions among them): niche innovations, the sociotechnical regime, the socio-technical landscape. Here, a
socio-technical regime illustrates the dynamics of stable

89

dimensions of society in science, technology, industry,
policy, market-user preference, and culture. The stable
nature of the regime often causes ‘‘lock-in’’ (Unruh 2000).
Niche innovations come from internal momentum, but
destabilization of the regime opens a window of opportunity for niches to come into the regime level. Destabilization of the regimes is often caused by changes in the
landscape. Transitions are not caused by a change in a
single aspect and level, but by the interplay of many
aspects, actors and levels (Schot and Geels 2008; Markard
and Truffer 2008; Raven 2007). MLP offers a comprehensive perspective for analyzing and understanding the
process whereby the niche becomes part of the mainstream
of a regime, which is then affected by the existing regime
and landscape. The number of papers reinforcing and using
MLP are increasing rapidly (e.g., Späth and Rohracher
2010; Lauridsen and Jørgensen 2010; Hodson and Marvin
2010; Kern 2012). For example, Späth and Rohracher
(2010) developed the MLP approach by analyzing the
regional dynamics toward an energy-safe future. Lauridsen
and Jørgensen (2010) highlighted problems resulting from
conflicting interpretations between regimes in their study
on the waste policy of the European Union.
Regarding the aviation industry, which is the focus of
this paper, several literature reports (e.g., Haan and de
Mulder 2002; Geels 2006a) have analyzed the transition to
the jet age. However, there is little research on innovation
transition after the jet age. Cohen (2010) and Kivits et al.
(2010) are two of the few papers to address this issue.
Kivits et al. (2010) assessed aviation energy alternatives
and concluded that consensus and perceived needs among
the aviation industry are important, but very difficult due to
the long product lifecycle and huge sunken costs (Kivits
et al. 2010). Innovation in aviation sustainability after the
mature jet regime is expected through research on plausible
technologies beyond the jet regime.
MLP can be utilized to analyze dynamic and interactive
processes among landscape, regime, and focal niche technology, but MLP is not used for depicting the dynamic
evolution of technology itself. In MLP, a technology is
regarded as static, thus MLP cannot explain the different
status of innovation diffusion among different technologies
in the same industrial domain governed by the same
landscape and regime (Fig. 1a).
Technology readiness level
One of the ideas used to resolve these issues is to assume
that each technology has a different influence according to
the technology development phase even when they occur
under the same landscape and regime. For any engineering
project, a measurement is needed to monitor a project for
control and implementation (Tan et al. 2011). TRL is a

123

90

Sustain Sci (2013) 8:87–101

Fig. 1 Conceptual diagram of
socio-technical transition.
a Existing multi-level
perspective (MLP) framework.
b MLP with technology
readiness levels (TRL)

Table 1 Technology readiness level (TRL) (NASA definition)
TRL

Definition

TRL 9

Actual system ‘‘mission proven’’ through successful mission operations (ground or space)

TRL 8

Actual system completed and ‘‘mission qualified’’ through test and demonstration in an operational environment (ground or space)

TRL 7

System prototyping demonstration in an operational environment (ground or space)

TRL 6

System/subsystem model or prototyping demonstration in a relevant end-to-end environment (ground or space)

TRL 5

System/subsystem/component validation in a relevant environment

TRL 4

Component/subsystem validation in a laboratory environment

TRL 3

Analytical and experimental critical function and/or characteristic proof-of- concept

TRL 2

Technology concept and/or application formulated

TRL 1

Basic principles observed and reported

measurement of technology used globally in the aviation
and other high technology industries for various purposes
such as procurements and risk-analysis in system development (Ramirez-Marques and Sauser 2009; Khan et al.
2011) and has several definitions. Table 1 shows NASA’s
definition, which is also used in this paper. Mankins (1995)
provided a descriptive discussion of each TRL as follows,
which are used widely to understand NASA’s TRL
(Conrow 2011):

(At) TRL 4 (F)ollowing successful ‘‘proof-of-concept’’ (validation at TRL 3), basic technological
elements must be integrated to establish that the
‘‘pieces’’ will work together to achieve conceptenabling levels of performance for a component and/
or breadboard. This validation must devised to support the concept that was formulated earlier, and
should also be consistent with the requirements of
potential system applications.

‘‘TRL 1 […] is the lowest ‘‘level’’ of technology
maturation. At this level, scientific research begins to
be translated into applied research and development.

(At) TRL 5, the fidelity of the component and/or
breadboard being tested has to increase significantly.
The basic technological elements must be integrated
with reasonably realistic supporting elements so that
the total applications (component-level, sub-system
level, or system-level) can be tested in a ‘simulated’
or somewhat realistic environment.

TRL 2 […] occurs when basic physical principles are
observed, then at the next level of maturation, practical applications of those characteristics can be
‘invented’ or identified. (A)t this level, the application is still speculative.
TRL 3 […] (A)t this step in the maturation process,
active research and development (R&D) is initiated.
This must include both analytical studies to set the
technology into an appropriate context and laboratory
based studies to physically validate that the analytical
predictions are correct.

123

TRL 6, (A) major step in the level of fidelity of the
technology demonstration follows the completion of
TRL 5. At TRL 6, a representative model or prototype system or system—which would go well beyond
ad hoc, ‘patch-cord’ or discrete component level
breadboarding—would be tested in a relevant
environment.

Sustain Sci (2013) 8:87–101

TRL 7 is a significant step beyond TRL 6, requiring
an actual system prototype demonstration in a space
environment. It has not always been implemented in
the past. In this case, the prototype should be near or
at the scale of the planned operational system and the
demonstration must take place in space.
By definition, all technologies being applied in actual
systems go through TRL 8. In almost all cases, this
level is the end of true ‘system development’ for most
technological elements.
And by definition, all technologies being applied in
actual systems go through TRL 9. In almost all cases,
TRL9 represents the end of a long line of last ‘bug
fixing’ aspects of true ‘system development’.
Figure 1 shows the concept of the introduction of TRL
to this paper and illuminates the difference of innovations
in the same technology domain.

Scope and methodology
This paper extends the empirical work of MLP to the civil
aviation industry. The civil aviation industry was chosen
because it is embedded in complex socio-technical system
where a variety of stakeholders from government, industry,
and society exist, and collaboration and interaction among
these stakeholders are imperative for transition toward a
sustainable society that mitigates climate control. In the
aviation industry, realizing sustainability2 requires not only
technological challenges, but also many severe social
challenges such as large investments from different stakeholders as well a change in their behavior in some cases.
Research on innovation transitions in the aviation industry
is also useful for other industries with similar industrial
characteristics such as transportation, and information and
communication.
Design of an innovation pathway for aviation sustainability is not a rudimentary task. There is not much dialogue between researchers of MLP and practitioners in the
aviation industry. According to recent conversations with
project managers for environment sustainability in aviation
research institutes including the National Aeronautics and
Space Administration (NASA) and the Japan Aerospace
Exploration Agency (JAXA), such transition research
approaches appear only rarely in the sustainability discourse in their institutes and governments. On the other
2

Aviation sustainability depends largely on whether the industry can
accommodate forecasted strong traffic increase to severe transport
market competitions and mitigation of noise, local air pollution and
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. Please see Nakamura et al. (2011)
for further discussion.

91

hand, managers in NASA and JAXA often emphasize that
the aviation industry needs a theory to support the industry
transition towards a more environment friendly regime.
Therefore, further research combined with industry interaction is required not only for conducting reliable academic
research, but also for designing salient solutions for aviation sustainability3.
Among environment challenges in the aviation industry,
the mitigation of climate change is the newest big issue, but
it has the least accumulated knowledge, while noise and
local air pollution were recognized as far back as the 1960s
(Lee et al. 2010). The impact of the aviation industry on the
effect of greenhouse gases (GHG) was estimated to be
3.5–4.9 % of current anthropogenic radiative forcing (Lee
et al. 2010). Both worldwide passenger traffic and cargo
traffic markets are forecast to grow continuously by more
than 5 % per year over the next 20 years4 (IATA 2009a;
Boeing 2010). To mitigate aviation-induced emissions, in
2010, the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO) achieved a global consensus to put forth more
effort in improving fuel efficiency than today, i.e., 2 %
annual fuel efficiency improvement, and are now trying to
set more ambitious goals such as carbon neutral growth by
2020 relative to the baseline of 2005 among its member
states, including developing countries (ICAO 2010). The
number of projects and investments with technologies to
deal with emissions mitigation has been increasing in this
context. For example, the European joint technology initiatives for aeronautics and air transport CLEAN SKY, and
the NASA Environmentally Responsible Aviation (ERA)
project have been working in this direction (Nakamura
et al. 2011).
The engine is the source of GHG and fuel consumption
in aviation operation and therefore technology innovation
in engines is very important. The thrust power of the first
jet engines, known as a pure jet, was all gained from the
exhaust jet gas. Letting the hot, very high-speed, air of
the exhaust jet into the relatively very low-speed air behind
3

The idea of using TRL as a measure of niche development came
from our conversation with engineers in the aviation industry during
this research. They considered that the analysis shown in this paper
was not enough to explain failure of ATP in 1980s and current
promising transition of GTF, while part of the reason might be that
they are engineers and are not familiar with sociological qualitative
discourse with socio-technical transition frameworks. They preferred
to discuss detailed level of the technology’s progress rather than the
generalized picture of transition.
4
Shocks to aviation such as the severe acute respiratory syndrome
(SARS) epidemic, the September 11 terrorist attacks and the Asian
financial downturn, which caused the bankruptcy of many airlines and
accelerated the reorganization of manufacturers, also increased global
discussions about the security and health problems associated with air
transport. However, the industrial perspective of a strong increase of
traffic has not been rewritten because the market has shown resiliency
by recovering from shocks within a relatively short period.

123

92

the engine and the aircraft causes a critical waste of kinetic
energy so that pure jet was very fuel inefficient initially. On
the contrary, turboprop engines used jet power to rotate the
blades. Rotating propellers push the air behind the engine
to obtain the thrust power. Turboprop engines are very
fuel-efficient. However, it is difficult to operate turboprops
at high speeds. When the tips of the blades reach supersonic velocity, shock waves are formed, increase the drag
and dramatically reducing thrust and efficiency (Fig. 2b).
Turbofan engines are a hybrid of ‘pure jet’ and turboprop
engines. Turbofan engines use jet power partly as the thrust
power from the exhaust jet and partly as mechanical power
to rotate the fan. One of the efficient measurements of a
turbofan is the bypass ratio, which is a ratio of the secondary air flow drawn in by the fan bypassing the engine
core to the primary air flow passing through the engine core
(Fig. 2c). Higher bypass ratios generally mean higher fuel
efficiency. The bypass ratio of the first commercial turbofans in the 1960s was five, while the latest turbofan has a
7.5–11 bypass ratio.
The ATP engine, whose uncompleted transition path this
paper investigates, is an innovative aviation engine that
achieves a 40 bypass ratio by removing the duct covering
the fan (Fig. 2a). This engine is a hybrid of the best features of both a turboprop and a turbofan engine, overcoming the tip supersonic velocity problem by using a
swept blade. On the other hand, GTF, whose promising
transition path this paper also investigates, has a modest
bypass ratio such as 12. For a fuel-efficient high bypass
turbofan engine, not only increasing the fan diameter but
also increasing the rotation speed of relatively smaller lowpressure compressor (LPC) and low-pressure turbine (LPT)
are necessary to maintain mechanical efficiency. However,

Fig. 2 Advanced turboprop
(ATP) engines. Schematic
images of a an unducted fan
(UDF) engine, a type of ATP;
b ATP total propulsive
efficiency advantage; and
c bypass ratio

123

Sustain Sci (2013) 8:87–101

the fan, LPC and LPT, are all connected with shafts so that
increasing the diameter and rotation speed of LPC and LPT
causes shock waves from the fan tips and therefore noise
and inefficiency. To optimize the rotational speed of the
fan, GTF is an innovative way to introduce a reduction gear
on the low spool of a two-shaft engine between the fan and
LPC/LPT. The reduction gear technology has its roots in
NASA’s ATP project. ATP and GTF engines are both
innovative and promising engines in terms of fuel-efficiency for short- and mid-haul aircraft.
ATP is now considered a mid-term engine innovation
for short and mid-haul aircraft that are expected to mitigate
climate change in the aviation industry (IATA 2009a). For
example, ATP engine demonstrations are planned in the
Sustainable and Green Engines (SAGA) research project
and the Smart Fixed Wing Aircraft (SFWA) research
project in CLEAN SKY. GE and NASA also tested a new
generation of ATP concepts for aircraft engines from 2009
to 2011. ATP was chosen because the failure of NASA’s
ATP project in the 1980s is still a big concern for those in
the industry who have just started new ATP projects.
The aim of this paper is two-fold. One goal is to analyze
factors affecting the development of the ATP project
including GTF within an MLP framework. What does MLP
tell us about NASA’s development? Even though the
engine concept itself is very attractive in terms of fuelefficiency, mounting an innovative engine to an aircraft is
not simple and does not guarantee the same level of fuelefficiency as the whole aircraft system due to technical and
social problems, such as trade-off between noise and fuelefficiency. ATP engines are generally nosier than turbofan
engines. The MLP analysis will derive useful implications
to understand and transform social-technical regimes

Sustain Sci (2013) 8:87–101

toward aviation sustainability. The second goal of this
paper is to elucidate mechanisms that differentiate GTF
from other ATP technologies in terms of MLP. Does MLP
help illuminate the fact that ATP did not make it to market
in the 1980s and was not ready by 2000? What does MLP
tell us about the development of GTF, which was derived
from a core technology developed in ATP projects, and
which will soon be introduced onto the market? To answer
these questions, we introduce the concept of TRL, and
discuss the mechanism of GTF development.
The MLP literature mainly reflects qualitative analysis
based on historical materials (Bennett and Pearson 2009).
This paper also consulted historical materials related to
NASA ATP projects from 1973 to 1992, which include
materials archived at the library in the History Division of
NASA Headquarters and from newspapers, books, reports,
and journals5. The authors also conducted two face-to-face
1-h interviews in 2010 and 2011 with engineers to check
the reliability of the archives used in this research and the
validity of our investigations of ATP history. One engineer
we spoke with works for Boeing as a noise specialist and
participated in 7J7 development, which was planned with
an ATP engine. Another worked for Fokker as an aircraft
designer and participated in aircraft development with ATP
until Fokker went bankrupt. The authors also consulted the
interviewees on their perceptions of the technology readiness of GE’s ATP engine because there were several articles specifically discussing GE. The interviewees reported
that engine manufacturers were confident about the realization of their ATP engines in 1980s. However, they also
said that weight problems due to additional insulators
needed in the integration of engines to aircrafts were
challenging even at the end of their projects. The Boeing
engineer added, ‘‘open rotor (ATP) is one of the most
efficient engines. We still investigate it every time we have
a project with small aircraft’’.

Analysis
We analyzed factors affecting development of the ATP
project including both fuel price and other factors based on
the existing MLP framework from the perspectives of
niche development, landscape change, and socio-technical
regime interaction. The 1973 oil embargo caused some US
senators and the 94th Congress in 1975 to examine how
NASA’s aeronautics division could save airlines and related services. Airlines were the national status industry and
5

These include ‘‘From engineering science to big science’’ (Bowles
and Dawson 1998), an article by Ziemianski and Whitlow (1988), and
Flight International, Aviation Week & Space Technology (AW&ST),
Journal of Aircraft Engineering, and The Journal of Turbomachinery
Society of Japan.

93

suffered badly from the energy crisis. ‘‘Jet fuel prices
jumped from twelve cents to over one dollar per gallon’’,
and ‘‘during the crisis, fuel represented over half of the
airlines’ operating costs’’ while ‘‘prior to 1972, fuel
accounted for one-quarter of the commercial airlines’ total
direct operating costs’’ (Ziemianski and Whitlow 1988).
Niche development
The concept of sweeping propeller blades came from
continuous efforts by engineers to ease the problem of
supersonic tip velocity and to extend the use of fuel-efficient propellers at the high speeds required in the jet age.
Unlike five other projects launched at NASA’s Aircraft
Energy Efficiency Program (ACEE), which ran from to
1986 with six projects: The Energy Component Improvement, the Energy Efficient Engines and the Advanced
Turboprop Project at the Lewis Research Center, the
Energy Efficient Transport, the Composite Primary Aircraft Structure, and the Laminar Flow Control at the
Langley Research Center (details of those projects can be
seen in Bowles and Dawson 1998), the ATP with sweeping
propellers failed to launch officially in 1977. Because many
people were skeptical about ATP technology feasibility,
early work of the assigned engineers in NASA was devoted
to project management jobs. NASA engineers conducted
surveys such as an investigation of whether civil aircraft
passengers would accept engines with old-fashion images
of propellers in the jet age in order to remove negative
concerns about the ATP project. Working closely with
external people such as policy makers, the engineers succeeded in an official launch of ATP projects in 1978.
The ATP project had a number of technical and social
challenges. Technical concerns included propeller efficiency at the targeted cruise speed, which was around 0.8
Mach, cabin noise, installation aerodynamics, drive systems such as the gearbox, and maintenance costs. Social
concerns included the perception of turboprops as oldfashioned, troublesome devices that were unsafe, and the
risk that airlines and passengers would not accept the
changes in traffic management because ATP aircraft would
need to fly slower and lower than a jet.
To challenge these issues, NASA took over the administrative role and created over 40 industry contracts and 15
institute grants through the following four stages of the
NASA ATP project: concept development (1976–1978),
enabling technology (1978–1980), large-scale integration
(1981–1987) and flight research (1987) (Bowles and
Dawson 1998; Ziemianski and Whitlow 1988).
At the stage of large-scale integration, the competition
between engine manufacturers and acceptance of the niche
was recognized. NASA originally developed a single
rotation tractor ATP system with a reduction gearbox with

123

94

contractors such as Hamilton Standard and Allison Gas
Turbine at the Division of General Motors. Then, to
NASA’s surprise, GE released a dual rotation pusher ATP
system without a gearbox, known as an unducted fan
(UDF). NASA later tested both GE’s UDF type ATP,
GE36, and a counter rotation with a reduction gearbox,
Model 578-DX, that Allison and Pratt & Whitney (P&W)
developed after GE revealed their UDF engine. Special
reports appeared in aviation journals about the Paris Air
Show and the Farnborough Air Show, both of which are
held biennially on different years. These special reports
told of the progress of the GE36 and 578-DX every year in
the mid-1980s.
The development of ATP technology was not limited to
NASA and its contract companies and institutes. For
example, France revealed their plans to build an ATP
model with sponsorship from the Ministry of Defense in
1982. Rolls Royce in the UK launched 3 years of ATP
engine research from 1984–1986. Many aircraft manufacturers initiated studies of a new aircraft model with ATP
engines in the late 1980s6.
While ATP projects achieved technological progress
and spread around the world, many challenges for ATP
engine aircrafts still remained into the late 1980s. The main
problem was noise and fatigue caused by the vibration of
the propellers in engine–airframe integration. The uncertainty of noise and fatigue by the vibration prolonged the
airworthiness certification process. Furthermore, to keep
the fuselage and engine free from noise and the risk of
blade destruction, the weight of the insulator offset the fuel
efficiency achieved by the engine itself.
Boeing announced delaying the certification process of
the 7J7 in 1987 and officially canceled the 7J7 project in
1993. In 1989, a few months after offering executive customers the experience of an ATP demonstrator to convince
them of lower noise than expected, McDonnell Douglas
started to study the V2500 turbofan engine as a possible
replacement for the planned ATP engines of the MD-90.
GE froze the development of the UDF type ATP engine in
1989. Many other projects were cancelled. In the late
1990s, there were few articles about ATP, and only a few
aircraft projects with ATP engines existed.
In the meantime, in the early 1990s, P&W started the
development of GTF, a turbofan with reduction gear,
which had its roots in the ATP project. GTF has a modest
bypass ratio from 10 to 12 and is able to save 8–10 % on
operating costs. P&W has kept GTF in their technology
6

For example, McDonnell Douglas’s MD88, MD91 and 92;
Boeing’s 7J7; the ATRA90 from a joint venture of Boeing,
Messerschmitt-Bolkow-Blohm (MBB) of Germany, Fokker B.V. of
Holland and Nusantara Aircraft Co. (IPTN) of Indonesia; the Fokker
P376, the Russian Tupolev Tu-34 and Antonov An-70 were all
planned to fly with ATP engines.

123

Sustain Sci (2013) 8:87–101

portfolio for 20 years and has accumulated hours of gearbox tests to respond to the skepticism on high-maintenance
risks of the gearbox.
Recently, ATP and GTF have been given another window of opportunity. In the aviation industrial technology
roadmap, the ATP engine is expected to be in new aircraft
design before 2020 and to reduce fuel consumption to
15–20 % (IATA 2009b). On the other hand, Bombardier
and Mitsubishi selected GTF engines, whose commercial
product development P&W launched in 1998, in the new
Canada Regional Jet (CRJ) aircraft project, and the Mitsubishi Regional Jet (MRJ) project in 2007. Lufthansa and
All Nippon Airlines (ANA) signed as launch customers of
CRJ and MRJ, respectively, in 2009. These aircrafts will be
delivered in 2013. The Boeing 737 series and Airbus A320
are also in the segment of ATP and GTF engines. Airbus
announced a new generation A320 with a new GTF engine
in 2010, and Boeing is now considering a new generation
737 rather than creating a new aircraft.
Landscape change
Several landscape changes influenced the aviation regime
and ATP and GTF. The first (1973–1974) and second
(1979–1980) oil embargo worked as the window of
opportunity for ATP technology by changing the priority of
activities of the US, NASA, and the airlines. Even though
fuel increases due to the oil shocks ended after several
years, these experiences implanted the fear that fuel prices
would once again increase some day. On the other hand,
the oil shocks experience did not change the regime of the
airlines in terms of business. At that time, when fuel costs
were the most dominant costs in the airlines’ overall costs,
the first priority was to reduce fuel costs, but the overall
principle of the airline business is to make a profit.
Another significant landscape change, for example, was
the end of the Cold War. In the 1970s, the fact that Russia
was advanced in terms of turboprop speed also put pressure
on the US to advance the preparation of the NASA ATP
project. When the Cold War ended, the military budget,
which was an important source for the US aviation
industry, decreased gradually so that the number of projects
for new technology in the aviation industry decreased.
The increasing world attention on the responsibility of
the aviation industry to climate change such as the Kyoto
protocol acted as a new opportunity for ATP and GFT
technology. However, soaring fuel prices in the early 2000s
acted as the greatest opportunity. During the oil shocks, for
example, the average paid price for a gallon was 3.07
dollars in 2008 and 1.05 dollars in 1981 according to data
released by the US Energy Information Administration and
Department of Labor (Fig. 3). Fuel-efficient technology
was needed in this context, and ATP needed to be

Sustain Sci (2013) 8:87–101

95

manufacturing activities including small specification
changes in the certificated products or supply chain.
Therefore any innovative technology will require additional costs and time in the aircraft certification process for
airworthiness. The long and costly certification process
was, and is always, a big constraint for manufacturers and
airlines in adopting an ATP aircraft. Even though GTF is
not as innovative as ATP technology, GTF is no exception
and it took GTF technology two decades to clear the barriers of the transition by convincing stakeholders of their
safety feasibility since the early 1990s through P&W’s
accumulated knowledge and tests about blades.
Technologies and infrastructures

Fig. 3 Spot kerosene prices (Source: US EIA and Department of
Labor, http://www.eia.gov/)

re-introduced and developed because ATP was a strong
candidate for the next leap in fuel-efficient technology.
Socio-technical regime interaction
Next, changes in the socio-technical regime in civil aviation were analyzed. Many changes that have worked as
supporters and interrupters to the niches exist. A sociotechnical regime has drivers. Smith (2007) summarized
various important characteristics suggested from previous
literature such as Geels (2002), Schot (1998), and Rip and
Kemp (1998) into seven dimensions. The seven dimensions
include the following, but not necessarily in this order: (1)
guiding principles, (2) technologies and infrastructures, (3)
industrial structure, (4) user relations and markets, (5)
policy and regulations, (6) the knowledge base for the
regime, and (7) cultural and symbolic meanings underpinning practices. These dimensions are useful for unraveling the complex nature of the aviation regime, and are
interrelated. For each dimension, we explain its current
nature and find changes and interactions that have affected
ATP and GTF transition.
Guiding principles
Among the key guiding principles in civil aviation, which
are to transport passengers and cargo faster, safer, farther,
and with more comfort than trains, ships, and vehicles,
safety is paramount. For the safety and security of passengers and governments, there is an array of regulations
and certifications such as the Chicago Conventions of
ICAO, the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) Standard, the European Aviation Safety Agency (EASA)
Standards, and bilateral agreements that regulate the airline
business including the flight route as well as aircraft

In the late 1980s, insulation of the fuselage to reduce the
noise of ATP weighed a lot and offset the fuel efficiency in
the aircraft configuration. The feasibility of light materials
such as carbon fiber reinforced plastics (CFRP) has
advanced greatly over the decades since then. In terms of
infrastructure, both in the past and today, there are still the
problems of how to support traffic route changes because
ATP aircraft must still fly lower and slower than jet
aircraft.
Industrial structure
The four major civil aircraft manufacturers are Boeing,
Airbus, Bombardier, and Embraer. The three major engine
manufacturers are Rolls Royce, GE, and P&W. Some jet
engines are produced under inter-company collaboration.
The rise of the Airbus drove US support to ATP technology
and NASA ATP projects when President Reagan tried to
cancel the NASA budget for ATP technology in the early
1980s. GE and P&W competition in ATP development also
accelerated the development of ATP in the 1980s.
Recently, aircraft and engine development have become
even more complex and require more human and financial
resources than before. Manufacturers tend to hedge risks
and investment and develop projects by contracting with
other companies. ATP was, and GTF might have been,
abandoned during such a trend. However, in the 1990s, by
trying to win the competition among engine manufactures,
P&W kept GTF-related technologies, including reduction
gears, in the technology portfolio. In the 2000s, the GTF
engine became a unique product of P&W. Recently, both
GE and Rolls Royce have announced ATP projects.
User relations and markets
Airlines, which are operators of aircraft and often the
owners of aircraft, have a strong need to reduce their
operational costs, such as fuel costs, airport charges and

123

96

maintenance costs, and various financial costs, because of
the highly competitive business of airlines. Global commercial airlines made a profit only twice in the 2000s, once
in 2006, and once in 2007 according to IATA world carrier
financial data. Therefore, when fuel prices calmed down,
airlines addressed the risk of increased maintenance costs
by using high-speed propellers. Fuel prices became lower
compared to the time of the oil shocks. The average paid
price for a gallon was US $1.05 in 1981, and US $0.56 in
1986, according to the US Energy Information Administration (EIA; http://www.eia.gov/) (Fig. 3). This highlighted the cost of ownership. A 30 % higher fuel
efficiency of the new aircraft with ATP engines that aircraft
manufactures announced should have interested government, NASA, and manufacturers even after considering the
initial costs in the tens of millions of dollars and the low
fuel price in the late 1980s. However, the risk of having
aircraft that were newer, nosier, and slower than conventional aircraft outweighed the interest. This landscape
change accompanying the oil shocks drove the direction of
government, NASA, and manufacturers toward the ATP
project, but airlines did not want to change their basic
preferences in the selection of a fleet.
Policy and regulations
Big regulation changes in the airline business occurred in
1987, the Airline Deregulation Act. Before the Act, the
Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB) controlled the fare, routes,
profits, and market entry of flights over states. Control on
fare and profit resulted in non-price competitions and
promoted the airline’s introduction of new equipment for
service differentiation (Jordan 1978), which might have
been favorable for a new technology such as ATP. However, non-price competition resulted in excessive equity
stock, cost increases, and inefficiency of operation
(Cherington 1958). The Act promoted market entry and
competition and drove numbers of mergers and acquisitions. In recent severe competition, the risk for buying an
innovative technology is high and thus, a very difficult
decision. There were other regulation changes that influenced the transition of ATP. Some airports have their own
regulations and charges for reducing noise. When aircraft
manufacturers tried to sell aircraft with ATPs in the late
1980s and the early 1990s, strengthening of the noise
standard was forecast; thus, many airlines were unwilling
to consider the ATP engine, which was noisier than the
conventional turbofan engine. Noise regulation is currently
much stricter than in the 1980s and is a disadvantage for
the ATP. On the other hand, there is a movement within the
ICAO to set a GHG emission standard that may regulate
airlines to operate aircraft only with a fuel-efficiency above
the standard. Such a standard is expected to guide

123

Sustain Sci (2013) 8:87–101

manufacturers and airlines to invest in environmentally
friendly technology. Europe, under the EU Emission Trade
System (EU-ETS) is currently proceeding with a positive
economic measure to promote CO2 reduction. EU-ETS
reflects the strong driving force of Europe towards sustainability, which includes its ambitions to become a leader
in sustainability development. However, as airline networks go beyond single governments and become global,
setting political and economic measures is difficult7.
However, if collaboration between regulators and industries toward implementation of innovation for sustainability is developed widely without jeopardizing safety, the
ATP transition path will be a lot smoother8.
Knowledge base
An aircraft is a highly complex system, which integrates a
fuselage, engines, and various equipment such as electric
flight control. Computer performance is a very important
part of the infrastructure for the design of each component,
and for the integration of components and equipment.
Computer performance in the 1970s enabled the examination of high-speed propellers, which was impossible in
the 1960s (Ziemianski and Whitlow 1988). Furthermore,
the performance of computers is much better than in the
epoch of the NASA ATP project. While high computer
performance and new materials enabled advanced detailed
research on ATP and GTF and pushed the ATP and GTF
project towards realization, the computers and materials
used in ATP development in the 1980s were so different
that the current ATP project cannot use much of the
research accumulated in the 1970s and the 1980s for the
NASA ATP project in a practical way.
Cultural, symbolic meanings
Even though the rise of low cost carriers (LCC) is now
changing part of the culture of flying, aviation, as a highly
technological, complex system still has status for both
employees and for passengers as a service. Safety, security
and reliability are paramount. Both production and operation are very important for a country’s economic and
military strategy. Current aviation is heavily locked in to
using jet fuel. Throughout the NASA ATP project, it was
7

In 2009, the US Air Transport Association of America (ATA) sued
the EU-ETS and in 2012, some airlines in China refused to finalize
orders of aircrafts from the European aircraft manufacture, Airbus.
8
For example, regarding the problems of cost and time consumption
associated with the certification for airworthiness, as discussed in
‘‘Guiding principles’’, a collective action for accelerating the
certification process for innovative technology for sustainability was
recently found in the certification of biofuel produced through the
Fischer–Tropsch process (ASTM D7566).

Sustain Sci (2013) 8:87–101

97

uncertain whether current flying and national cultures
would accept going ‘backwards’ to using a propeller
instead of a modern jet.
Introduction of TRL to MLP
In the previous sub-sections, we summarized the situation
faced by ATP and the aviation industry and analyzed factors affecting the development of ATP projects. While
general understanding about the ATP failure in the 1980s
hinges on the end of soaring fuel prices, our analysis using
MLP shows additional interrelated changes of the different
levels of promoting the ATP project, such as relationships
with policy makers, competition among engine manufacturers, improved feasibility of light materials, and progress
of computer technology. We also discuss factors interrupting the transition of niche ATP, such as the end of the
Cold War, safety as the guiding principle, the low profitability of airlines, and noise regulation. This means that
analysis with MLP can extract both supporting and interrupting factors of a niche’s development, depending upon
the timing of the window of opportunity. However, these
factors are common to both ATP and GTF, because GTF is
in the same technology domain as ATP. The fate of the
ATP project and the current promising transition of GTF
cannot be explained.
Figure 4 visualizes the transition of niches described in
the previous section, based on TRL measurements. Evaluations of TRL at each period are based on engineers’
inspections. TRL 9 is the stage where a niche system has
matured enough to be on the market. ATP technology was
at its early TRL stages when the first opportunity window
opened. Roche and his colleague filed a US Patent,
US4171183A, for a ‘‘multi-bladed, high speed prop-fan’’ in
September 1976. The concept of a multi-bladed high-speed
propfan, therefore, must have been created before the
ACEE’s ATP project. Otherwise, the ATP concept would
not have been a candidate for ACEE when the window of
opportunity opened.
The industrial expectation of fuel-efficient technologies,
industrial competition, and development of computers and
materials accelerated the development of ATP engines.
However, ATP did not close the gap between TRL 7 and 8
while the window was open. After closure of the window,
ATP was abandoned. The success of the current ATP
projects in GE and NASA and in CLEEN SKY is not
assured even when opportunity knocks. TRL lost out when
the opportunity closed due to the change in design processes and materials, which used to be the driver of ATP.
On the other hand, P&W kept the GTF project in its
technology portfolio just after the NASA ATP projects.
After the opportunity for green technology reopened in the
early twenty-first century, GTF is now on the way to TRL

Fig. 4 Schematic image of ATP and GTF transition in TRL
measurement. Gray background Opportunity window, white background closed window

9. Two aircraft manufacturers selected this engine in 2007,
and airlines selected the aircraft in 2009. Figure 4 shows
the importance of continuous engineering efforts between
opportunity windows for GTF transition.

Discussion
Socio-technical regime and TRLs
TRL—originally a tool of technology measurement—can
be controversial when applied to MLP because of the risk
of focusing too much on the technological aspects of a
socio-technical transition. However, Fig. 4 highlights the
interaction of social factors. In ATP, as in most cases in the
aviation industry nowadays, a niche cannot progress to
such high stages without both a market and social feasibility due to the large investment required for stepping to a
next TRL stage. Therefore, interactions between technology and diverse social factors in each TRL are essential in
developing and implementing technology in society.
Technological readiness and niche stock
Discussions about how to manage technology until a niche
matures enough to be seen in a market are few. Stages of
TRL 2–6 are now often well managed by institutes such as
NASA ERA and CLEEN SKY after the rise of aviation
responsibility toward sustainability. And SNM covers
mainly TRL 2–3 to TRL 6. The aviation industry seeks
theoretical support for phases TRL 1–3 and TRL 7 to TRL
9. The stages from TRL 7–9, which require high costs, used
to be covered by military applications during the Cold War.
The stages from TRL 7 to TRL 9 are very important for
innovative technology to acquire enough safety reliance
required from the civil aviation regime. Current discourse
on SNM and MLP assumes the pre-existence of candidates

123

98

of niche technology, but in reality this is not so. The stages
from TRL 1 to TRL 3 are important for accumulating niche
stocks as future candidates of niche technology. Technology at these earlier TRLs are usually invented and investigated in academia rather than in industry. Therefore, in
future SNM research, the principle of academic discovery
and research development and also academia-industry
collaboration has become an important research topic for
the technology classified into these TRLs.
A dynamic and uneven opportunity window
MLP and SNM have shown how a niche interacts with
other factors of socio-technical regimes and landscapes.
The socio-technical regimes and landscapes can open a
channel for a niche technology to become a mainstream
technology. However, as shown in Fig. 4, TRL should be at
a certain level before the window of opportunity opens, and
these options must mature before the window closes. The
window of opportunity is not static and uniform. The
window opens and closes depending on the landscape and
regime change at that time. Different organizations face
different widths of window, which depend on the conditions that each organization faces and the capability of each
organization to adopt to the change of the landscape and
regime. MLP and SNM usually downplay technological
progress itself, rather than downplaying other social,
institutional, and organizational factors, but how to support
people in the field to manage the dynamic and uneven
opportunity window should be discussed.
Risk of launch customer
The MLP approach emphasizes that the transition path is
made of multiple dimensions. However, for the aviation
industry, the dimension of the market is the most important. While SNM covers the stages from TRL 2 to TRL 6,
the transition after TRL 7 depends highly on the manufacturers and the airlines. Furthermore, manufacturers will
stop development at a certain stage if the airline does not
sign as a launch customer. In the 1980s, no airline took the
risk of being a launch customer for the Boeing 7J7 and
MD-90 series so that these new aircraft projects were
canceled. In 2007, two airlines signed for CRJ and MRJ
with GTF. For airlines, to be a launch customer of a new
aircraft has both advantages and risks. One of the advantages is that many demands from the launch customer can
be integrated into the final specification of the product. The
effect of advertising on airline brand awareness is large.
However, there are also many risks, such as, whether the
manufacturer achieves the committed operational and
maintenance performance, safety, and schedule. Airlines
know from their experience that a new engine will be

123

Sustain Sci (2013) 8:87–101

troublesome. How to reduce the perceived risk, which
delays an airline’s decision to be the launch customer
should be discussed in future research.
Institutional supports of export products
MLP accounts for policy and regulation issues, but focuses
on these factors from the point of view of adaptation of
innovation. However, even in the research and development phase, policy and regulation issues are important in
the aviation industry. When we discussed institutional
strategic support for the stages from TRL 7–9 in the previous section, we had to be especially careful in considering World Trade Organization (WTO) issues. The WTO
Subsidies and Countervailing Measures Agreement (SCM
Agreement) is an international agreement to discipline
government subsidies. Here, all export subsidies are prohibited because they distort the market. Although the
ambiguities in the interpretation of ‘‘import subsidy’’ and
the SCM Agreement are crucial problems, many types of
government assistance provided to the civil aircraft
industry are likely to fall under the SCM Agreement definition of subsidies (Cunningham and Lichtenbaum 2005).
Europe, the US, Canada, and Brazil were all accused of
supporting the export of Airbus, Boeing, the Bombardier,
and the Embraer, respectively, by the government of the
competing company. According to several people in the
public relations department of CLEEN SKY, CLEEN SKY
does not go above a TRL 6 to avoid the WTO dispute.
Perhaps this problem may be overcome by promoting
collaboration among industries rather than governments. If
so, then problems regarding expectations arise again.
Interaction of niches
Both ATP and GTF are being developed in 2012. However,
the success of GTF will delay the transition of ATP to the
market. Many specialists are worried that ATP cannot be
on the market before 2020. ATP engines are suitable for
short- and mid-haul aircraft, but are not yet ready yet to be
mounted in a real aircraft project. On the other hand, GTF
engines, which are also suitable for short- and mid-haul
aircraft, and whose commercial product development P&W
launched in 1998, were selected by Bombardier and
Mitsubishi in the new Canada Regional Jet (CRJ) aircraft
project, and the Mitsubishi Regional Jet (MRJ) project in
2007. Lufthansa and All Nippon Airlines (ANA) signed as
the launch customer of CRJ and MRJ, respectively, in
2009. These aircraft will be delivered in 2013. The Boeing
737 series and the Airbus A320 are also in the segment
of ATP and GTF engines and both companies have
announced a new generation 737 and A320 with a new
high bypass turbofan engine (and GTF engine for A320)

Sustain Sci (2013) 8:87–101

99

Fig. 5 The long product life
cycle of an aircraft

rather than creating a new aircraft with ATP. Considering
the long product life cycle of an aircraft (Fig. 5), it is very
unlikely that a new aircraft project in this segment with the
ATP engine will be launched before 2020 due to the spread
of GTF. Visualization of such niche interaction is important in understanding innovation transition and is part of
our future research.

Concluding remarks
This paper analyzed innovation in the aviation industry,
which is locked stiffly into the current regime and faces
sustainability issues. The paper also extends the framework
of MLP to TRL. The authors believe that a scientific theory
created by a generalized process of individual phenomena
should be tested by repetitive application of theory to a
certain domain, in this case, the aviation industry, which
will contribute to the sophistication and improvement of
the theory.
The aviation industry has started renewed ATP development as one of its most promising sustainability innovations. ATP failure in the late 1980s was generally
considered the end of an opportunity window first opened
during the 1973–1974 and 1979–1980 oil embargos. MLP
analysis on ATP’s unfinished transition illuminated the
factors in a multi-level perspective that have supported and
interrupted ATP transition from the early 1970s until now.
MLP illuminated interrelated changes of factors promoting
the ATP project including relations with policy makers,
competition among engine manufactures, improved feasibility of lighter materials, and progress of computer technology. MLP also extracted factors interrupting the
transition of niche ATP, such as the end of Cold War,
safety as the guiding principle, low profitability of airlines,
and noise regulation.
Stiff market preference, and safety certification, which
were recognized as factors interrupting the 1980s ATP
transition, and a change in knowledge infrastructure, which
was recognized as a support factor of the 1980s ATP
transition, are now hindering the current ATP transition.

The authors observed that the same type of changes in a
dimension of the socio-technical regime could both support
and interrupt a niche, depending on the timing of the
window of opportunity.
The difficulty in investigating details of the transition of
two niches in the same technology domain was undertaken
with a new measurement of niche development. As discussed in this paper, while MLP offers a comprehensive
perspective for analyzing and understanding an innovation
transition process, we believe that MLP analysis cannot
explain the detailed transition of several innovations in the
same technology domain. GTF is a niche in the same
technology domain as ATP, and therefore, concluding that
GTF and ATP should have different transition paths under
the influence of the socio-technical regime and landscape
within the existing MLP framework is difficult. In this
paper, ATP and GTF analysis in MLP frameworks were
facilitated by introducing TRL, a globally used measure of
technology readiness in the aviation and other high technology industries. MLP with TRL should now provide
greater information to study the deeper mechanisms of the
innovation process. In addition, even though TRL is a
technology measurement, TRL when combined with MLP
analysis highlighted the interaction of social factors. This is
because a niche cannot progress to higher stages without a
market and social feasibility due to the large investment
required in going to the next step. Therefore, interactions
between technology and diverse social factors in each TRL
are essential for the development and implementation of
technology in society. We discussed the different roles of
socio-technical regime at different TRLs. The introduction
of TRL into MLP enables us to discuss functions of regime
and landscape in transition paths such as technology
readiness and niche stock, dynamic and uneven opportunity
windows, institutional support of export products, and the
risk of a ‘launch’ customer. The introduction of TRL to
the framework of MLP can be beneficial for showing the
complex structure of transitions, and to comprehend factors
affecting technology and R&D projects in each TRL.
TRL not only supports academic research and theoretical development, but also collaboration among scholars of

123

100

these theories, as well as practitioners and engineers, by
elucidating the tacit knowledge of experts. Therefore, the
application of TRL measurements to cases will appear soon
in other industrial sectors with similar characteristics such
as transportation, and information and communication
technologies.
Acknowledgments We appreciate the critical and helpful comments by the editors and anonymous reviewers. We would like to
express our gratitude to those who helped with useful information
about ATP.

References
Abrahamson E (1991) Managerial fads and fashions—the diffusion
and rejection of innovations. Acad Manag Rev 16:586–612
Abrahamson E, Rosenkopf L (1993) Institutional and competitive
bandwagons—using mathematical-modeling as a tool to explore
innovation diffusion. Acad Manag Rev 18:487–517
Abrahamson E, Rosenkopf L (1997) Social network effects on the
extent of innovation diffusion: a computer simulation. Organ Sci
8:289–309
Attewell P (1992) Technology diffusion and organizational learning—the case of business computing. Organ Sci 3:1–19
Bennett S, Pearson JGP (2009) From petrochemical complexes to
biorefineries? The past and prospective co-evolution of liquid
fuels and chemicals production in the UK. Chem Eng Res Des
87:1120–1139
Boeing (2010) Current Market Outlook 2010–2019. Retrieved 28
August 2010. http://www.boeing.com/commercial/cmo/
Bowles MD, Dawson VP (1998) The advanced turboprop project:
radical innovation in a conservative environment. In: Mack PE
(ed) From engineering science to big science—The NACA and
NASA Collier Trophy Research Project Winners, chap 14.
National Aeronautics and Space Administration, NASA History
Office, Washington, DC
Brown LA (1981) Innovation diffusion: a new perspective. Methuen,
London
Cherington PW (1958) Airline price policy: a study of domestic
airline pares. Harvard University Press, Cambridge (cited In:
Shiomi E (2006) Research of US aviation policy, Bunshindo
Press, Tokyo)
Chrysovalantou M, Petrakis P (2011) Timing of technology adoption
and product market competition. Int J Ind Organ 29:513–523
Cohen MJ (2010) Destination unknown: pursuing sustainable mobility in the face of rival societal aspirations. Res Policy
39:459–470
Conrow EH (2011) Estimating technology readiness level coefficients. J Spacecr Rockets 48(1):146–152
Cunningham OR, Lichtenbaum P (2005) The agreement on trade in
civil aircraft and other issues relating to civil aircraft in the
GATT/WTO system. In: Macrory EJP, Appleton EA, Plummer
GM (eds) The World Trade Organization: legal, economic and
political analysis, vol 1. Springer, Berlin
Dosi G (1982) Technological paradigms and technological trajectories—a suggested interpretation of the determinants and directions of technical change. Res Policy 11:147–162
Eaton J, Kortum S (2006) Innovation, diffusion, and trade, Cambridge, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
Series, No. 123585
Freeman C (1974) The economics of industrial innovation. Penguin,
Harmondsworth

123

Sustain Sci (2013) 8:87–101
Geels FW (2002) Technological transitions as evolutionary reconfiguration processes: a multi-level perspective and a case-study.
Res Policy 31(8–9):1257–1274
Geels FW (2006a) Co-evolutionary and multi-level dynamics in
transitions: the transformation of aviation systems and the shift
from propeller to turbojet (1930–1970). Technovation 26:999–1016
Geels FW (2006b) The hygienic transition from cesspools to sewer
systems (1840–1930): the dynamics of regime transformation.
Res Policy 35:1069–1082
Geels FW (2010) Ontologies, socio-technical transitions (to sustainability), and the multi-level perspective. Res Policy 39:495–510
Geroski PA (2000) Models of technology diffusion. Res Policy
29:603–625
Grin J, Rotmans J, Schot J, Geels FW, Loorbach D (2010) Transitions
to sustainable development: new directions in the study of long
term transformative change. Routledge, New York
Haan A, de Mulder K (2002) Sustainable air transport: identifying
possibilities for technological regime shifts in aircraft construction. Int J Innov Manag 6:301–318
Hegger DLT, Villet J, Villet BJM (2007) Niche management and its
contribution to regime change: the case of innovation in
sanitation. Technol Anal Strateg Manag 9:729–746
Hodson M, Marvin S (2010) Can cities shape socio-technical
transitions and how would we know if they were? Res Policy
39(4):477–485
Hoogma R, Kemp R, Schot J, Truffer B (2002) Experimenting for
sustainable transport: the approach of strategic niche management. Spon, London
IATA (2009a) The IATA Technology Roadmap Report, 3rd edn.
IATA
IATA (2009b) Carbon-neutral growth by 2020, Press releases.
http://www.iata.org/pressroom/pr/2009-06-08-03.htm (last accessed
March 2010)
ICAO (2010) Agenda Item 17: Environmental protection ‘‘A more
ambitious, collective approach to international aviation greenhouse gas emissions’’, ICAO Working Paper, A37-WP/186
Ieromonachou P, Potter S, Enoch M (2004) Adapting strategic niche
management for evaluating radical transport policies: the case of
the Durham road access charging scheme. Int J Transport Manag
2:75–87
Jaffe AB, Newell RG, Stavins RN (2002) Environmental policy and
technological change. Environ Resour Econ 22:41–69
Jones B, Miller B (2007) Innovation diffusion in the new economy:
the tacit component. Routledge, New York
Jordan WA (1978) Airline performance under regulation: Canada vs
the US. Logist Transp Rev 14(3):297–337 [cited in Shiomi E
(2006) Research of US aviation policy, Bunshindo Press, Tokyo]
Kajikawa Y (2008) Research core and framework of sustainability
science. Sustain Sci 3:215–239
Kemp R, Schot J, Hoogma R (1998) Regime shifts to sustainability
through processes of niche formation: the approach of strategic
niche management. Technol Anal Strateg Manag 10:175–195
Kemp R, Rip A, Schot AJ (2001) Constructing transition paths
through the management of niches. In: Graud R, Karnoe P (eds)
Path dependence and creation. Erlbaum, Mahwah
Kern F (2012) Using the multi-level perspective on socio-technical
transitions to assess innovation policy. Technol Forecast Soc
Chang 79:298–310
Khan RSR, Lagana MC, Ogaji SOT, Pillidis P, Bennett I (2011) Risk
analysis of gas turbines for natural gas liquefaction. J Eng Gas
Turbines Power 133:071704. doi:10.1115/1.4002673
Kivits R, Charlesa MB, Ryanb N (2010) A post-carbon aviation
future: airports and the transition to a cleaner aviation sector.
Future 42:199–211
Lauridsen EH, Jørgensen U (2010) Sustainable transition of electronic
products through waste policy. Res Policy 39(4):486–494

Sustain Sci (2013) 8:87–101
Lee DS, Pitari G, Grewe V, Gierens K, Penner JE et al (2010)
Transport impacts on atmosphere and climate: aviation. Atmos
Environ 44(37):4678–4734
Linstone HA (1999) Decision making for technology executives:
using multiple perspectives to improve performance. Artech
House, Boston
Mankins JC (1995) Technology readiness levels. NASA Office of
Space Access and Technology White Paper
Markard J, Truffer B (2008) Technological innovation systems and
the multi-level perspective: towards an integrated framework.
Res Policy 37:596–615
Metcalfe JS (1981) Impulse and diffusion in the study of technical
change. Futures 13:347–359
Nakamura H, Kajikawa Y, Suzuki S (2011) Innovation for sustainability in aviation: world challenges and visions. In: Nobre F,
Walker D, Harris R (eds) Technological, managerial and
organizational core competencies: dynamic innovation and
sustainable advantage. IGI Global, USA, pp 55–72
Nelson RR, Winter SG (1977) In search of useful theory of
innovation. Res Policy 6:36–76
Popp D, Hascic I, Medhi N (2011) Technology and the diffusion of
renewable energy. Energy Econ 33:648–662
Ramirez-Marques JE, Sauser BJ (2009) System development planning via system maturity optimization. IEEE Trans Eng Manage
56(3):533–548
Raven RPJM (2006) Towards alternative trajectories? Reconfigurations in the Dutch electricity regime. Res Policy 35:581–595
Raven RPJM (2007) Co-evolution of waste and electricity regimes:
multi-regime dynamics in the Netherlands (1969–2003). Energy
Policy 35:2197–2208
Raven RPJM, Geels FW (2010) Socio-cognitive evolution in niche
development: comparative analysis of biogas development in
Denmark and the Netherlands (1973–2004). Technovation
30:87–99
Rip A, Kemp R (1998) Technological change. In: Rayner S, Malone
EL (eds) Human choices and climate change. Resources and
technology, vol 2. Battelle, Columbus
Schot JW (1998) The usefulness of evolutionary models for
explaining innovation: the case of the Netherlands in the 19th
century. History Technol 14:173–200

101
Schot JW, Geels FW (2008) Strategic niche management and
sustainable innovation journeys: theory, findings, research
agenda, and policy. Technol Anal Strateg Manag 20(5):537–554
Smith A (2006) Niche-based approaches to sustainable development:
radical activists versus strategic managers. In: Bauknecht D,
Kemp R, Voss J (eds) Sustainability and reflexive governance.
Elgar, Camberley
Smith A (2007) Translating sustainabilities between green niches and
socio-technical regimes. Technol Anal Strateg Manag 19(4):427–
450
Späth P, Rohracher H (2010) ‘Energy regions’: the transformative
power of regional discourses on socio-technical futures. Res
Policy 39(4):449–458
Straub DW (1994) The effect of culture on it diffusion—e-mail and
fax in Japan and the United-States. Inf Syst Res 5:23–47
Tan W, Ramirez-Marquez J, Sauser B (2011) A probabilistic
approach to system maturity assessment. Syst Eng 14:279–293
Unruh GC (2000) Understanding carbon lock-in. Energy Policy
28(12):817–830
Van Lente H (1997) Towards an integrated conceptual framework:
modern biotechnology and the greening of industry, Prepared for
the European Commission—JRC Institute for Prospective
Technological Studies, Seville
Venkatesh V, Morris MG, Davis GB, Davis FD (2003) User
acceptance of information technology: toward a unified view.
MIS Q 27:425–478
Verbong G, Geels F (2007) The ongoing energy transition: lessons
from a socio-technical, multi-level analysis of the Dutch
electricity system (1960–2004). Energy Policy 35:1025–1037
Weber M, Hoogma R, Lane B, Schot J (1999) Experimenting with
sustainable transport innovations. Workbook for strategic niche
management. CEC Joint Research Centre, Seville
Ziemianski JA, Whitlow JB (1988) NASA/Industry Advanced
Turboprop Technology program, prepared for the 16th congress
of the International Council of Aeronautical Sciences. Jerusalem,
Israel

123

