Space Sci Rev (2018) 214:107
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-018-0521-6

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go
Sample Acquisition Mechanism (TAGSAM)
E.B. Bierhaus1 · B.C. Clark1 · J.W. Harris1 · K.S. Payne1 · R.D. Dubisher1 ·
D.W. Wurts1 · R.A. Hund1 · R.M. Kuhns1 · T.M. Linn1 · J.L. Wood1 · A.J. May1 ·
J.P. Dworkin2 · E. Beshore3 · D.S. Lauretta3 · the OSIRIS-REx Team

Received: 1 April 2017 / Accepted: 28 June 2018 / Published online: 20 September 2018
© The Author(s) 2018

Abstract The Origins, Spectral-Interpretation, Resource-Identification, Security and Regolith-Explorer (OSIRIS-REx) spacecraft supports all aspects of the mission science objectives, from extensive remote sensing at the asteroid Bennu, to sample collection and return to
Earth. In general, the success of planetary missions requires the collection, return, and analysis of data, which in turn depends on the successful operation of instruments and the host
spacecraft. In the case of OSIRIS-REx, a sample-return mission, the spacecraft must also
support the acquisition, safe stowage, and return of the sample. The target asteroid is Bennu,
a B-class near-Earth asteroid roughly 500 m diameter. The Lockheed Martin-designed and
developed OSIRIS-REx spacecraft draws significant heritage from previous missions and
features the Touch-and-Go-Sample-Acquisition-Mechanism, or TAGSAM, to collect sample from the surface of Bennu. Lockheed Martin developed TAGSAM as a novel, simple
way to collect samples on planetary bodies. During short contact with the asteroid surface,
TAGSAM releases curation-grade nitrogen gas, mobilizing the surface regolith into a collection chamber. The contact surface of TAGSAM includes “contact pads”, which are present
to collect surface grains that have been subject to space weathering. Extensive 1-g laboratory testing, “reduced-gravity” testing (via parabolic flights on an airplane), and analysis
demonstrate that TAGSAM will collect asteroid material in nominal conditions, and a variety of off-nominal conditions, such as the presence of large obstacles under the TAGSAM
sampling head, or failure in the sampling gas firing. TAGSAM, and the spacecraft support
of the instruments, are central to the success of the mission.
Keywords OSIRIS-REx · Bennu · Asteroid · TAGSAM · Spacecraft
OSIRIS-REx
Edited by Dante Lauretta and Christopher T. Russell
B.C. Clark, R.A. Hund and E. Beshore are retired.

B E.B. Bierhaus

edward.b.bierhaus@lmco.com

1

Lockheed Martin Space Systems, Littleton, CO, USA

2

NASA Goddard Spaceflight Center, Greenbelt, MD, USA

3

Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA

107

Page 2 of 46

Acronyms
ACS
ASC
EDU
EGA
FOV
GN&C
HGA
IRAD
LM
LGA
MAVEN
MGA
MLI
MRO
NFT
OCAMS
OLA
OSIRIS-REx
OTES
OVIRS
PHS
PI
PICA
REXIS
RGO
SARA
SFD
SLA
SRC
TAG
TAGSAM
TCM
TLS
T-VAC
TWTA
UTTR

E.B. Bierhaus et al.

Attitude Control System
Advanced Scientific Concepts
Engineering Development Unit
Earth-Gravity Assist
Field of View
Guidance Navigation and Control
High Gain Antenna
Internal Research and Development
Lockheed Martin
Low-Gain Antenna
Mars Atmosphere and Volatile Evolution
Medium Gain Antenna
Multi-Layer Insulation
Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter
Natural Feature Tracking
OSIRIS-REx Camera Suite
OSIRIS-REx Laser Altimeter
Origins, Spectral Interpretation, Resource Identification, Security-Regolith
Explorer
OSIRIS-REx Thermal Emission Spectrometer
OSIRIS-REx Visible and near-IR Spectrometer
Plastic Hollow Spheres
Principal Investigator
Phenolic Impregnated Carbon Ablator
Regolith X-Ray Imaging Spectrometer
Reduced-Gravity Office
Sample Acquisition and Retention Assembly
Size-Frequency Distribution
Super-Light Ablator
Sample Return Capsule
Touch And Go
Touch-And-Go Sample-Acquisition Mechanism
Trajectory Correction Maneuver
Tagish Lake Simulant
Thermal-Vacuum [in reference to Thermal-Vacuum testing]
Traveling Wave Tube Amplifiers
Utah Test and Training Range

1 Introduction
OSIRIS-REx (Origins, Spectral-Interpretation, Resource-Identification, Security and Regolith-Explorer) is NASA’s first asteroid sample return mission, selected as the third mission in the New Frontiers program (after New Horizons to Pluto and Juno to Jupiter). New
Frontiers is a competitively selected, cost-capped, and Principal Investigator (PI) led program of solar system exploration missions managed by NASA’s Marshall Spaceflight Center. OSIRIS-REx will travel to the approximately 500-meter-diameter (Nolan et al. 2013)
B-class asteroid Bennu, believed to be carbonaceous rich (Clark et al. 2011), and will return

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go Sample. . .

Page 3 of 46

107

at least 150 g of sample from Bennu to Earth (Lauretta et al. 2017). Dante Lauretta (Univ. of
Arizona) is the PI, and the mission is managed by NASA Goddard Spaceflight Center. Lockheed Martin designed and built the spacecraft, sampling system, and sample return capsule
(SRC), and will operate the mission from its facilities in Littleton, Colorado.
The mission incorporates four science payloads, a student experiment, and measurements
of the asteroid gravity derived from the spacecraft communications system. The instruments
include the OSIRIS-REx Camera Suite (OCAMS), a visible-light suite of three cameras
provided by the University of Arizona (Rizk et al. 2017); the OSIRIS-REx Visible and nearIR Spectrometer (OVIRS), a point-spectrometer covering wavelengths from 0.4 to 4.3 µm,
provided by NASA Goddard (Reuter et al. 2017); the OSIRIS-REx Thermal Emission Spectrometer (OTES), a point thermal spectrometer covering wavelengths from 5 to 50 µm, provided by Arizona State University (Christensen et al. 2017); the OSIRIS-REx Laser Altimeter (OLA), a scanning lidar contributed by the Canadian Space Agency, provided by MacDonald, Dettwiler and Associates and York University (Daly et al. 2017); REXIS (Regolith
X-Ray Imaging Spectrometer), a student experiment (Masterson et al. 2018), jointly implemented between MIT and Harvard, that conducts coded-aperture imaging for X-ray photons
in the 0.5–7.5 keV range; and the “radio-science experiment,” which uses the X-band communications system to measure Bennu’s gravitational field (McMahon et al. 2017). In addition to the science instruments, the mission utilizes a Touch-and-Go Sample-Acquisition
Mechanism (TAGSAM) to collect the asteroid sample.
On September 8, 2016, the OSIRIS-REx spacecraft was carried into space on an Atlas
V411 launch vehicle in the first second of the launch window for the day. Cruise to the
asteroid will last about two years, and includes an Earth gravity assist on September 22,
2017. Asteroid operations, including the asteroid approach phase, start in late 2018 and
culminate in sample collection in July 2020. The spacecraft can depart the asteroid as early
as March 2021 and returns the sample to Earth in September 2023.
This paper describes the OSIRIS-REx spacecraft and the sampling system. In Sect. 2,
we summarize the scientific and engineering requirements, which provide the basis to understand the subsequent description of the spacecraft and TAGSAM. In Sect. 3, we provide
a spacecraft description, including the basic characteristics of the spacecraft, its trajectory,
mission operations, and instrument accommodation. In Sect. 4, we describe TAGSAM, including results of extensive ground- and reduced-gravity testing, and the contact pads, which
collect surface material. Section 5 is an overall summary of the content.

2 Mission Requirements
The spacecraft design derives from mission requirements. The overarching science objectives for OSIRIS-REx are (Lauretta et al. 2017): return and analyze a sample, map Bennu’s
global properties, document the sample site, study the Yarkovsky Effect, and improve asteroid astronomy. The implementation requirements to meet these science objectives can
be subdivided into: provide round-trip capability from Earth to Bennu; support the science
instruments during their data acquisition at Bennu; support the proximity operations and
achieve sample collection; and provide a means to safely return the sample to Earth. The
spacecraft is sized and architected to provide the various resources (propulsion, power, data,
etc.) and capabilities (sample collection, Earth return) necessary to implement these requirements.
The top Level 1 requirements are a combination of the fundamental science objectives
of the mission, and programmatic elements from NASA. The Level 1 requirements drove a

107

Page 4 of 46

E.B. Bierhaus et al.

broad set of Level 2 requirements that provide an increased level of specificity and define
organizational responsibility for meeting the requirements. Generally the Level 2 categories
include science, at-asteroid operations, and mission requirements. Each of these categories
has subcategories. For example, science consists of sample science and remote-sensing science, at-asteroid operations consist of the different proximity phases, and mission requirements consist of all the functions necessary for a sample-return mission (e.g., launch vehicle,
trajectory, sample return, lifetime, redundancy). Each of these categories decomposed into
a set of Level 3 requirements that define requirements for the instruments and spacecraft.
The required returned sample mass is 60 g (Lauretta et al. 2017). The spacecraft uses
a change in moment of inertia to measure the sample mass. The level of accuracy of this
technique results in a derived requirement for TAGSAM to collect 150 g to ensure at least 60
g reside within TAGSAM. In addition to the bulk sample, there is a requirement to provide
26 cm2 of area on the contact surface with properties that select for small surface grains. This
requirement is driven by the science motivation to understand space weathering, which is a
process or set of processes that alter(s) material on the surface of an airless body, changing
the material spectral, and possibly other, properties over time. This evolution of the surface
material leads to uncertainty in the relationship between the observed spectra and the bulk
properties of an object. Space weathering is likely a result of exposure to solar flux (solar
particles and UV wavelengths) over time. Recent observations of Vesta (Blewett et al. 2016)
suggest that space weathering can be object (i.e., mineral?) dependent. By acquiring material
at the surface via the contact pads, and bulk material via the gas collection, the combined
sample returned by TAGSAM will provide important ground-truth that links the properties
of the surface and bulk samples.
The returned sample must also be pristine, where pristine is defined in terms of both a
contamination threshold and a temperature threshold. Dworkin et al. (2017) provides a detailed discussion of the contamination requirements. The temperature requirement is to ensure the sample does not exceed +75°C. Though near-equatorial surface temperatures likely
exceed this value on Bennu, not all surface and near-surface materials on Bennu experience
temperatures higher than +75°C. Higher-latitude surface materials do not, nor do subsurface
materials just a few cm below the surface. The gas-driven mobilization can entrain materials from the near subsurface. Thus it is possible that TAGSAM will collect material that
has not been heated above +75°C, either due to sampling at a higher latitude, or collecting
subsurface material, or both, thus motivating the need for this requirement.
A number of data sets support the presence of sampleable regolith on Bennu, including thermal inertia, radar polarization values, and the shape itself. (See Lauretta et al.
(2017) for an overview of the science rational for Bennu as a target for sample return.)
Emery et al. (2014) derive a thermal inertia for Bennu of 310 ± 70 J m−2 K−1 s−1/2 . Recall that thermal inertia correlates with regolith properties: bedrock has thermal inertia values that exceed 2000 J m−2 K−1 s−1/2 , whereas the fine-grained top layer of the lunar regolith has a thermal inertia of about 50 J m−2 K−1 s−1/2 . Itokawa has a thermal inertia of
700 ± 100 J m−2 K−1 s−1/2 (Mueller 2007). The highest resolution images of the Muses-C
region on Itokawa show a granular bed with a size-frequency distribution (SFD) with a cumulative power-law index of about −2.5. The resolution limit of those images resolve grain
sizes around 1–2 cm. In comparison, Emery et al. (2014) estimate Bennu’s average grain
size to be between a few tenths of a mm to a few mm. Nolan et al. (2013) find a 12.6 cm
radar circular polarization ratio of 0.18 ± 0.03, and a 3.5 cm radar circular polarization ratio
(CPR) of 0.19 ± 0.03. The polarization ratio is a metric of surface roughness, a value of
zero corresponds to a surface that is smooth at the scale of the radar wavelength, whereas
a value of one corresponds to a surface that randomizes the incident waves. Nolan et al.

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go Sample. . .

Page 5 of 46

107

(2013) find that Bennu has one of the lowest 3.5 cm CPRs of small bodies measured, and
note that the object with the most similar value is Phobos. Spacecraft images of Phobos indicate a generally smooth surface, indicating a fine-grained regolith. For comparison, Nolan
et al. (2013) report that Itokawa has a 3.5 cm CPR value of 0.47 ± 0.04, over twice that of
Bennu. Finally, Bennu’s shape, described in Nolan et al. (2013) has two notable features: it
is more symmetrical than other NEAs, and has an equatorial ridge. The leading explanations
(Scheeres et al. 2016) for both aspects of its shape invoke behaviors of granular material.
To reach Bennu, the spacecraft was launched on an Atlas V-411 on September 8, 2016.
The launch vehicle provided an Earth-escape trajectory. A deep-space maneuver targeted
an Earth flyby on September 22, 2017, which adjusted the inclination of the spacecraft
trajectory to match that of Bennu. The spacecraft commences proximity operations at Bennu
in the fall of 2018, nominally will collect the sample in July of 2020, and will return the
sample to Earth on September 24, 2023.
This trajectory corresponds to solar ranges between 0.77 AU and 1.39 AU, Earth ranges
between 0 AU and 2.29 AU, and Sun-Probe-Earth (SPE) angles between 0 deg and 180 deg.
The solar ranges define the thermal load on the spacecraft, and in conjunction with the power
usage of the spacecraft components and instruments, define the needed solar array area. The
Earth ranges, SPE angles, and data volume define the telecommunications requirements for
the spacecraft. The total delta-v needed is 1500 m/s, including margin.

3 OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft
The fundamental purpose of the OSIRIS-REx spacecraft is to provide a platform that
achieves the mission science objectives. The spacecraft is an intellectual and technical offspring of the Stardust mission, carrying significant heritage in the SRC, appreciation of
contamination concerns, and mission operations including the critical sample recovery on
Earth. The spacecraft also benefits from design, development, and deep-space experience of
Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO), Juno, Phoenix, and MAVEN (Mars Atmosphere and
Volatile Evolution).

3.1 The Spacecraft
Figure 1 is an overview of the Lockheed Martin-designed and built OSIRIS-REx spacecraft,
derived from several generations of successful deep-space, planetary missions. The notable
features that define the physical profile of the spacecraft include two, 2-axis articulated solar
arrays, a high-gain antenna (HGA), engines, and the science deck. In the Cartesian coordinate system centered on the spacecraft, the science deck is the +z side of the spacecraft and
houses all science instruments, SRC, and the “shoulder” of the TAGSAM arm. The HGA
points in the +x direction, the solar arrays are mounted on the +y and −y axes, and the
main engines point in the −z direction.
The spacecraft is a combination of high heritage plus mission-specific designs to meet
the OSIRIS-REx mission requirements. The spacecraft design derived from the classical,
hierarchical approach to requirements definition, and heritage hardware, experience, and
processes that meet those requirements.
The spacecraft provides all capabilities necessary to support the science instruments and
collect and return the sample to Earth: an on-board computer that monitors, manages, and
controls other spacecraft electronics and subsystems, as well as commanding the science

107

Page 6 of 46

E.B. Bierhaus et al.

Fig. 1 (a) The left-hand figure shows the OSIRIS-REx spacecraft in the launch configuration. The +z deck
is “up”, and houses all the science instruments and the SRC. (b) The right-hand image shows the spacecraft
in the sampling configuration during TAG. (This view is “upside down” relative to the left-hand image)

instruments and storing science data prior to transmission to Earth; a propulsion and control subsystem that provides all required trajectory maneuvers after release from the launch
vehicle, and which manages the spacecraft attitude and pointing; a power subsystem that
uses a combination of solar arrays and batteries to power the spacecraft and instruments;
a thermal-control subsystem that maintains all spacecraft components and instruments to allowable temperature ranges; a telecommunications (telecom) subsystem that receives commands from Earth, transmits science data from the spacecraft to Earth, and which supports
tracking for navigation; and the Sample Acquisition and Retention Assembly (SARA), an
assembly that integrates the arm, TAGSAM head, and SRC.

3.1.1 Structure
The spacecraft structure consists of aluminum-honeycomb core with graphite-composite
facesheets. This design provides (i) a light-weight support for all other spacecraft components, (ii) the strength necessary to survive the launch environment and (iii) the stiffness to meet science-instrument pointing requirements. The structure consists of a ∼1.3-mdiameter core cylinder (Fig. 2) that houses the main propellant tank, a forward deck, an aft
deck, and gussets. The forward deck is also known as the science deck, as it houses all of
the science instruments (Fig. 1). The forward and aft decks are ∼2.5 m on a side, and the
spacecraft (not including the height of components on the science deck) is about 1.3 m tall.
The structure supports the fully fueled (“wet mass”) launch weight of ∼2100 kg, of which
∼880 kg is the dry mass of the spacecraft and the remainder is fuel.
A subset of the spacecraft structure is the Sample Acquisition and Return Assembly,
or SARA (Fig. 3). SARA consists of a separate plate that houses the SRC and TAGSAM
arm, and is mounted to the +z deck of the spacecraft. SARA streamlined the analysis and
testing to ensure proper alignment between the TAGSAM head, the arm, the launch container, and the SRC. The addition of a separate plate also enabled parallel development of
SARA and the rest of the flight system. SARA includes a launch container for the TAGSAM
head, which preserves the cleanliness of the head during ground operations and launch, and

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go Sample. . .

Page 7 of 46

107

Fig. 2 The OSIRIS-REx structure. (a) The left-hand image is the core cylinder, aft deck, and boat-tail (the
interface to the launch vehicle). (b) The right-hand image is the complete structure in preparation for the
static loads test

Fig. 3 (a) The left-hand image is a CAD rendering of SARA, which consists of a common mounting plate
for the TAGSAM arm and SRC. (b) The right-hand image is a picture of the flight hardware on a crane, in
preparation for installation on the spacecraft

protects the head from outgassing contamination during initial cruise. The launch container
received a continuous nitrogen purge from the time the flight head was inserted in the container until launch, maintaining a positive pressure around the TAGSAM head to guard
against contamination before flight.
The SRC (Fig. 4) is nearly identical to the SRC for the Stardust mission, a successful
NASA mission that captured samples from comet Wild 2 and returned them to the Earth
in 2006 (Brownlee 2014). Simple differences from Stardust include the interface that holds
the TAGSAM head (vs. the aerogel tray for Stardust) and updates to the avionics, parachute

107

Page 8 of 46

E.B. Bierhaus et al.

Fig. 4 (a) The left-hand image shows the OSIRIS-REx SRC mounted to a spin table (for a spin-balance test).
The white section on top is the PICA heatshield, this is the leading face during atmospheric entry. (b) The
right-hand image shows the SRC in the “open” configuration, which is the configuration during TAGSAM
insertion during flight (the mounting in this image is 90 deg relative to the left-hand image). The top of the
sample canister is visible in the PICA side, while the TAGSAM capture ring is visible on the backshell side

release system, the spring seal, shock mitigation, and the addition of small witness plates.
The Stardust experience demonstrated that a homing beacon was unnecessary. The SRC was
originally developed as part of a Lockheed Martin (LM) Internal Research and Development
(IRAD) program, and leveraged LM’s long history with entry systems and heatshields. The
SRC uses a monolithic Phenolic-Impregnated Carbon Ablator (PICA) heatshield, which protects the capsule during the intense heating period of reentry—well over 99% of the kinetic
energy of the SRC is removed by heating caused by drag as the capsule enters the Earth’s
atmosphere. The backshell thermal protection material is the Lockheed Martin-developed
Super-Light Ablator (SLA). The interior of the SRC contains the drogue and main chutes,
the simple electronics necessary for the autonomous sequencing that occurs during entry,
and the sample canister that houses the TAGSAM head containing the sample of Bennu.
Details of TAGSAM will be described in the next section.

3.1.2 Telecommunications (telecom)
The X-band telecom subsystem includes low-gain, medium-gain, and high-gain antennas—
LGA, MGA, and HGA, respectively—and 100-W RF traveling-wave tube amplifiers
(TWTAs). The HGA is ∼2 m diameter (Fig. 5). Table 1 summarizes the downlink data
rates over the course of the mission, and the mission phases in which the antennas are used.
In practice, actual data rates will depend on the spacecraft-Earth range and the angle of the
antenna boresight relative to Earth. Over the course of the mission, the spacecraft will downlink over 165 GBytes of science and optical navigation data, of which about 150 GBytes are
during asteroid proximity operations. The HGA supports the majority of the science-data
downlink; the MGA and LGA are used during operations when high data rates are not necessary, or when the HGA cannot maintain Earth point during certain spacecraft maneuvers
or operations.

3.1.3 Propulsion
The propulsion subsystem is a pressurized mono-propellant design that uses ultrapure hydrazine, consisting of the main propellant tank (Fig. 6), a helium pressurant tank, four 200 N

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go Sample. . .

Page 9 of 46

107

Fig. 5 The ∼2-m HGA during a
fit check on the spacecraft in the
Lockheed Martin clean room

Table 1 Downlink data rates by mission phase
Mission Phase

LGA Rates

HGA Rates

MGA Rates

Launch
Outbound cruise

2000 bps

N/A

N/A

200 bps

300 kbps

N/A

Science Phase

200 bps, TAG: 40 bps

200 kbps to 916 kbps

TAG: 40 bps

Departure

N/A

10 kbps to 200 kbps

40 bps

Return cruise

40 bps to 10 kbps

10 kbps to 300 kbps

40 bps

SRC release

10 kbps to 200 kbps

Fig. 6 The OSIRIS-REx main fuel tank. (a) The left-hand image shows the main fuel tank in a rotation
fixture to facilitate ground processing. (b) The right-hand image shows the fuel tank after thermal blanket
installation

main thrusters, six 22 N Trajectory Correction Maneuver (TCM) thrusters, sixteen ∼4.5 N
Attitude Control System (ACS) thrusters, and two ∼0.5 N thrusters. Aerojet Rocketdyne
provided all thrusters for the spacecraft. The main thrusters support the largest maneuvers
required for the mission, including deep-space maneuvers, asteroid-rendezvous, and asteroid departure. The TCM thrusters are for “cleanup” burns after the main burns; the cleanup
burns are to correct residual errors from the larger main-engine burns. The ACS thrusters are
for fine maneuvering, especially during asteroid operations, when small velocity changes are
essential for maintaining proper orientation and trajectory alignment in the ultralow gravitational environment of Bennu; these thrusters also execute the back-away burn after Touch
And Go (TAG). The smallest thrusters are for ultraprecise maneuvers that are necessary to

107

Page 10 of 46

E.B. Bierhaus et al.

Fig. 7 A flight solar panel

set up the correct spacecraft state in preparation to depart Bennu orbit for closer reconnaissance, TAG rehearsals, and TAG.

3.1.4 Power
The power subsystem includes two solar arrays, redundant Yardney Technical Products
lithium-ion batteries, and avionics to manage the power demands of all the spacecraft components. Each solar array (Fig. 7) is ∼2.25 m on a side, and collectively the solar panels
generate between roughly 1200 W and 2800 W, depending on solar range. Each solar array
is attached to the spacecraft with a two-axis gimbal, providing a range of solar array orientations relative to the main spacecraft bus, and thus enabling power generation in variety
of spacecraft orientations during asteroid proximity operations. The batteries provide spacecraft power when the solar arrays are off sun, which includes several events during asteroid
operations, including the sampling event.

3.1.5 Thermal
The OSIRIS-REx thermal subsystem maintains appropriate temperature ranges for all spacecraft components throughout the lifetime of the mission. The thermal subsystem uses a
combination of temperature sensors, heaters, multi-layer insulation (MLI), and coatings to
achieve the required temperatures. Figure 8 is the spacecraft in the thermal-vacuum (T-VAC)
chamber with MLI blanketing installed. Two mission-specific considerations were central to
thermal analysis: the first was to ensure compliance with the science requirement that the
TAGSAM head not exceed 75°C after sample collection; the second was the collaboration
between the thermal engineers and science team to ensure compliance with temperatures
while at the asteroid.
Because pre- and post-sample-collection operations place the TAGSAM head in the Sun,
there was significant work to understand the solar-range threshold that caused the anodized
aluminum TAGSAM head to exceed that temperature. The analysis predicted that TAGSAM
temperatures safely remain below +75°C for solar ranges > 1.15 AU for the vast majority
of head geometries relative to the Sun; thus, a constraint on sampling operations is that they
take place only when the spacecraft and Bennu ranges meet this criterion.
The temperature of the spacecraft is insensitive to thermal emission from Bennu until
the spacecraft approaches the asteroid surface, at which point the solid angle subtended by
the asteroid has two effects: (i) the view factor filled by the asteroid reduces the view factor

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go Sample. . .

Page 11 of 46

107

Fig. 8 (a) In the left-hand image, the spacecraft is lowered into the T-VAC chamber; this view shows the
launch-vehicle interface side. (b) The right-hand image is the spacecraft inside the T-VAC chamber; this view
shows the science deck

of radiative cooling to deep space, and (ii) the asteroid itself is a significant additional heat
source, increasing the thermal flux on the spacecraft. The science team developed an asteroid
thermal model (Emery et al. 2014) that provided estimated surface temperature distributions
across the asteroid. These temperatures were an input to the spacecraft thermal analysis.
The combined asteroid-plus-spacecraft thermal modeling demonstrated that all spacecraft
components remain within their allowable temperature ranges during all asteroid proximity
operations, including the sample-collection event for ranges > 1.15 AU.

3.1.6 Guidance, Navigation and Control
The OSIRIS-REx Guidance Navigation and Control (GN&C) subsystem includes the classical functionality of deep space missions—those that are necessary to control spacecraft
attitude and maintain knowledge of the spacecraft in three-dimensional space—as well as
capabilities to support TAG operations when the spacecraft leaves orbit and descends to
within a few meters of Bennu’s surface.
The components that support the classical functionality include a set of redundant Honeywell inertial measurement units, Honeywell reaction wheels, redundant SELEX-EX star
trackers, and redundant Adcole sun sensors. The reaction wheels provide precise spacecraft
attitude control, as well as a smooth transition between two or more attitudes. The star trackers and sun sensors provide attitude knowledge.
Controlling a spacecraft in proximity to, or in orbit around, a small body involves several
unique considerations due to the relative magnitude of forces acting on the spacecraft. Unlike for a planetary orbiter, solar radiation pressure is comparable to the gravitational force of
the asteroid. In addition, Bennu’s irregular shape introduces a spatial variability to the gravitational field (McMahon et al. 2017). To ensure accurate knowledge of the spacecraft state in
these conditions, the GN&C system utilizes: a lidar (Fig. 9), provided by Advanced Scientific Concepts (ASC); and a navigation camera (hereafter simply “nav” camera), provided by
Malin Space Science Systems (Bos et al. 2017), in conjunction with Natural Feature Tracking (NFT), a Lockheed Martin-developed optical navigation capability (Olds et al. 2015;
Hamilton et al. 2016) [see the next section]. The lidar and NFT provide independent, redundant, and complementary techniques to ensure safe spacecraft operations when approaching

107

Page 12 of 46

E.B. Bierhaus et al.

Fig. 9 A flight ASC lidar, used
for proximity operations at
Bennu, just prior to installation
on the spacecraft. A black plate,
which was removed before flight,
covers the send and receive
optical apertures

and contacting the asteroid surface. For lidar-based navigation, range and range-rate monitoring determine the actual spacecraft position relative to the predicted position (Berry et al.
2013). If the measured value falls outside a predicted corridor, the spacecraft executes an
escape burn, eliminating the chance of unexpected contact with the asteroid. For NFT-based
navigation, the spacecraft monitors location relative to the asteroid via images acquired at a
regular cadence.

3.2 Natural Feature Tracking
NFT is an LM-developed image-based navigation system, and OSIRIS-REx is the first
NASA mission to incorporate autonomous navigation as a means of navigating around a
small body. NFT provides a method, independent of the GN&C lidar, to determine the spacecraft state relative to the asteroid. Olds et al. (2015) provide a more detailed description of
the architecture and capabilities; we provide a short overview here. NFT was originally developed under Lockheed Martin IRAD before incorporation to the OSIRIS-REx mission.
NFT combines two capabilities: image analysis and trajectory analysis. The imageanalysis capability ingests images from the navigation camera and searches those images
for features. The source library for features comes from ground-based processing of previously collected image data from the science cameras during earlier phases of the mission.
NFT compares identified features with those in an on-board library of known features to
determine the location and attitude of the spacecraft relative to the surface. Based on that location assessment, in conjunction with previous observations, the spacecraft predicts where
it will be in the future by forward propagating the spacecraft orbit.
NFT provides an autonomous means to navigate during proximity operations. The nav
camera takes images at a prescribed cadence, which NFT processes via a Kalman filter to
update the spacecraft position and velocity. NFT monitors the spacecraft state relative to the
key events that transition the spacecraft from its initial orbit-departure burn to final TAG.
These events include Checkpoint and Matchpoint (Fig. 13), two range-crossing thresholds,
and TAG. Checkpoint and Matchpoint mark the spacecraft position where maneuvers are
executed that set the spacecraft on a true approach trajectory to the surface, and target a
specific location on the surface, respectively. The range-crossing thresholds trigger additional software state changes in preparation for TAG. For TAG itself, NFT also provides an
estimate for when and where the spacecraft will touch the asteroid.
Testing has shown that NFT exceeds all navigation requirements for TAG, including the
maximum TAG ellipse size (25 m radius), predicting the state of checkpoint to within 2 m
and 10 mm/s. Together, GN&C lidar-based and NFT-based navigation provide the spacecraft

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go Sample. . .

Page 13 of 46

107

Fig. 10 (a) The left-hand figure is a CAD model of the entire OSIRIS-REx spacecraft, with a perspective
view from above the +z deck, otherwise known as the “science deck” because it houses all of the science
instruments. (b) The right-hand figure is the layout of the science instruments on that deck, with many of the
spacecraft components removed to highlight the locations and respective positions of the science instruments
on the science deck

with redundant, wholly independent means to determine the spacecraft state relative to the
asteroid, enhancing the reliability of the mission to operate around and near the asteroid
surface.

3.3 Instrument Accommodation
The spacecraft provides the necessary mechanical, thermal, and electrical support (power,
commanding and telemetry, data management) to each instrument to ensure they achieve
the science data collection necessary to meet all mission science and operation requirements. Figures 10–12 illustrate the location and orientation of the instruments on the spacecraft. PolyCam, MapCam, OTES, OVIRS, OLA, and REXIS all share a common boresight
(Fig. 16). This is so that all, or some subset, of the instruments can observe the same region
on the asteroid simultaneously. This is a major advantage for a small-body mission, when
the target object has an irregular shape. Small changes in viewing angle, distance, or other
aspect of the observing geometry can have much greater effects on the observed surface relative to a spherical planet. Simultaneous data acquisition between instruments removes this
challenge—the relative positions between the instruments on the spacecraft are well known,
so it is straightforward to combine simultaneous data sets from two or more instruments.
SamCam is the lone exception; its boresight is specifically oriented to include the TAGSAM
head when in sampling position; this geometry is so SamCam can view the asteroid surface
during approach and TAG, providing valuable context for the collected sample.
OCAMS OCAMS consists of three separate imaging systems controlled by a common
electronics box (Rizk et al. 2017):
• PolyCam, a 20-cm-diameter Ritchey-Chretien telescope used for optical navigation during approach and high-resolution imaging during asteroid operations. PolyCam has an
IFOV of ∼0.014 mrad and a FOV of ∼0.8 deg.
• MapCam, a modified double-Gauss refractor design with an f/3.3, 5.3° field of view
(FOV) used for wide-angle imaging, as well as satellite surveys and plume searches.

107

Page 14 of 46

E.B. Bierhaus et al.

Fig. 11 A perspective view of
the science deck illustrating the
locations of the science
instruments relative to one
another. OVIRS resides on the
side of the spacecraft to provide a
clear view for the instrument
radiators

MapCam also includes a four-color filter wheel to obtain color imagery of Bennu’s surface and to obtain wide-band spectrophotometric observations. MapCam has an IFOV of
0.068 mrad and a FOV of ∼4 deg.
• SamCam, a wide-angle Cooke triplet refractor design used for recording the touch-and-go
event with a very wide 22° field of view and a depth of focus that allows in-focus imaging
at 3 meters. SamCam has an IFOV of 0.354 mrad and a FOV of ∼21 deg.
The PolyCam and MapCam boresights parallel the spacecraft +z axis, while the SamCam boresight has a 9.4° angle in the −y direction to approximately center the TAGSAM
head within the FOV at the contact point on the surface of the asteroid. PolyCam is the
highest-resolution imager on OSIRIS-REx, and its imaging requirements determined the
spacecraft pointing and stability. All three imagers have solar keep-out zones to protect the
instruments (i.e., a camera boresight should never be less than a certain angle from the Sun).
The keep-out zones from the boresights are ±30° for SamCam and MapCam, and ±40° for
PolyCam. These constraints are built into the flight rules of the spacecraft, and thus prior to
upload to the spacecraft, each attitude is evaluated to ensure compliance with the keep-out
zones.
OVIRS OVIRS is a point spectrometer covering wavelengths from 0.4 µm to 4.3 µm, with
a 4-mrad FOV (Reuter et al. 2017). OVIRS uses a radiator, oriented in the −y direction,
to cool the detector to operating temperatures. OVIRS has two major assemblies: the first
holds the aperture, optics, and detector; the second houses the control electronics. OVIRS
data will provide information on Bennu’s composition by measuring spectral bands that are
diagnostic of water and organic materials, and will provide an important bridge between the
point-observations of asteroids from ground-based observatories to disk-resolved spectra.
Two features of OVIRS required attention during spacecraft design and operations planning. First, OVIRS carries a two-stage radiator, which achieves focal plane temperatures of
∼105 K, and optics enclosure temperatures < 160 K (Reuter and Simon 2012). These temperatures provide the low thermal background necessary for the infrared observations. To
provide the radiators with a clear view of deep space, OVIRS is mounted to the −x side of
the spacecraft (Figs. 10 and 11). To ensure proper operational temperatures for OVIRS, this
side of the spacecraft is usually pointed anti-sunward. Second, OVIRS uses a solar calibration aperture that is mounted 90° from the primary instrument aperture. These calibration
observations will occur periodically throughout the mission.
OTES OTES is a Fourier-transform interferometer point spectrometer that collects thermal infrared data from ∼5.7 µm to 50 µm (Christensen et al. 2017). OTES is a single

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go Sample. . .

Page 15 of 46

107

Fig. 12 Perspective views of the science deck and cones representing the field-of-views (FOVs) of the instruments. Except for SamCam, all instruments are co-boresighted to the +z axis. SamCam is angled to see the
TAGSAM head when extended in its sampling position. The colors for each FOV are as follows: OLA, dark
purple; OVIRS, red; OTES, green, PolyCam, yellow; MapCam, light purple; SamCam, light blue; REXIS,
dark blue

assembly, housing all optics, the detector, and control electronics. OTES data will determine mineralogical and thermal properties of Bennu. Despite measuring thermal/long-IR
wavelengths, OTES does not require special cooling or other unusual temperature-sensitive
considerations (Christensen et al. 2017). During instrument integration on the spacecraft,
initial checkouts carried an unexpected amount of noise. The noise was ultimately traced to
a nitrogen purge, and thus represented no risk to the instrument in flight.
Collectively, OCAMS, OVIRS, and OTES will let OSIRIS-REx acquire spatially resolved spectra from visible wavelengths to 50 µm across the asteroid. OVIRS and OTES
are both point spectrometers; they achieve spatially resolved spectra by acquiring data as
the spacecraft slews, which sweeps the instrument FOVs across the asteroid surface.
OLA OLA is a two-axis scanning lidar, the first such instrument to fly on a planetary
mission (Daly et al. 2017). OLA consists of two major components: the optical unit, which
houses the lasers, mirrors, and detectors, and the control electronics unit. OLA will provide
an unprecedented high spatial- and vertical-resolution data set of the entire asteroid’s surface. The instrument mirror scans independently of the spacecraft motion, either in a simple
1D motion, or in 2D (Daly et al. 2017). This achieves the high spatial resolution relative to
previous planetary lidars.
REXIS REXIS is an X-ray spectrometer that observes energies from 0.5 keV to 7 keV
(Masterson et al. 2018) and is an experiment developed and built as a joint student collaboration between MIT and Harvard. REXIS observes X-ray fluorescence of elements activated
by solar X-rays. REXIS consists of two components: a detector/electronics assembly that
includes a coded-aperture mask to support 2D imaging, and a monitor of the stimulating
solar X-ray flux. The imaging assembly is mounted on the +z science deck with the other
remote sensing instruments (Figs. 11 and 12), while the solar monitor is mounted to observe
in the +y direction.
The common boresight between most of the remote sensing instruments provides other
advantages. There is a common keep-out zone for spacecraft components and solar illumination, supporting clear fields of view for all the instruments. In addition, the common
boresight simplifies operations, ensuring common visibility to the asteroid surface for all the
instruments during the remote sensing campaign.

107

Page 16 of 46

E.B. Bierhaus et al.

The OSIRIS-REx spacecraft provides a stable, thermally compliant platform for the science instruments during operations. The spacecraft supports the remote sensing observations
during the pre-TAG phases of asteroid operations, which acquire a rich data set to determine
the optimal TAG site that balances safety, sample collection, and science value. The spacecraft itself, in conjunction with the TAGSAM arm and TAGSAM head, is central to the core
science goal of the mission: sample collection and return. Section 4 describes the TAGSAM,
the technology that obtains the sample.

3.4 Contamination Requirements and Implementation
The pristine character of the returned samples depends on two elements of the OSIRIS-REx
architecture: contamination control and contamination knowledge. Contamination control
limits what terrestrial materials are exposed to spacecraft, and therefore the sample. Constraints on contamination control are developed by science requirements and practical constraints of developing and testing a spacecraft. Given that some contamination that will
occur, contamination knowledge measures the contamination, enabling a more precise evaluation of the returned sample’s composition. Dworkin et al. (2017) provide a comprehensive
review of the contamination requirements. Here we focus on efforts to establish contamination knowledge.
Witness plates monitor the environment of the spacecraft and TAGSAM throughout the
lifecycle of the hardware, including “ground” and “flight” witness plates. “Ground” witness
plates were present during spacecraft assembly and were routinely monitored and replaced
to assess the environmental exposure as the spacecraft was built and tested. “Flight” witness
plates are present on the TAGSAM head, in the TAGSAM wrist, and inside the SRC, to
monitor accumulation of materials during in-flight operations. Here we briefly describe the
ground witness plates; Sect. 4.3 describes the flight witness plates.
Ground witness plates were of two types: active monitoring for contamination control
(contamination monitoring plates, or CMP), and contamination knowledge plates, which
were exposed and collected during spacecraft assembly and test to archive the spacecraft
environment during this development phase. Both types were used to determine particulate
levels, particle fallout rates, amino acid residue levels, and Non-Volatile Residue (NVR)
levels. Contamination monitoring plates collected particulates passively during cleanliness
monitoring procedures and were placed as close as possible to contamination-sensitive areas,
to obtain the most accurate particulate readings.
In addition to the witness plates, hardware samples, or coupons, from spacecraft components, which were processed in the same fashion as the flight hardware, were delivered to
NASA’s Johnson Space Center curatorial facility as part of the long-term library of materials available to identify terrestrial contamination in the samples. The combination of ground
and flight witness plates, and archived spacecraft materials, support the return and analysis
of pristine sample from Bennu.

3.5 Operations
Lauretta et al. (2017) provide a detailed description of the mission plan. Here we provide an
overview of the mission portions most relevant to TAGSAM operations.
Outbound Cruise An Atlas V411 carried OSIRIS-REx into space on September 8, 2016,
with a launch C3 of ∼29.3 km2 /s2 . A deep-space maneuver (DSM) in January 2017 adjusted
the trajectory to set up an Earth-Gravity Assist (EGA) on September 22, 2017. After the

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go Sample. . .

Page 17 of 46

107

Fig. 13 A schematic overview of the TAG rehearsals and final TAG event. The operations team guides the
spacecraft through two rehearsals, each one decreasing the range to the asteroid, before the actual TAG and
sample collection event. This enables confirmation of the navigation and spacecraft operations necessary prior
to committing the spacecraft to surface contact

EGA, no further trajectory modifications occur until the asteroid approach phase, at which
point a series of thruster firings, two weeks apart, progressively decrease the relative velocity
between the spacecraft and Bennu. The TAGSAM head remains in the launch container
during this time.
Proximity Operations Proximity operations (proxops) begin in November 2018, and end
after successful sample collection, nominally in July 2020. Proxops includes the following
subphases: Preliminary Survey, Orbit A, Detailed Survey, Orbit B, Reconnaissance Phase,
TAG Rehearsals, and finally TAG itself. All of the phases up to the Reconnaissance Phase
provide increasingly detailed measurements of the asteroid surface and provide the OSIRISREx project with information to decide on the TAG location.
TAG Rehearsals After final selection of the TAG site, the operation team conducts a
series of rehearsals over the TAG site as a part of a deliberate and incremental steppingstone approach to ensure a successful sampling event (Berry et al. 2013; May et al. 2014).
The first rehearsal, known as the “checkpoint” rehearsal (Fig. 13), includes a burn that
transitions the spacecraft from asteroid orbit to asteroid approach. This rehearsal includes
acquisition of navigation images and GN&C–lidar ranges, deployment of the TAGSAM
arm to sampling position, and spacecraft slews necessary to achieve attitudes required for
navigation. At a range of 125 m, the spacecraft executes a burn to return to orbit rather
than one intended to proceed to the surface. The spacecraft transmits all navigation data to
Earth to confirm that range, range rates, attitudes, and events occurred as planned. After
positive confirmation of a successful checkpoint rehearsal, the spacecraft proceeds to the
next rehearsal.

107

Page 18 of 46

E.B. Bierhaus et al.

The second rehearsal, known as the “matchpoint” rehearsal (Fig. 13), includes all of the
steps from the checkpoint rehearsal and several additional events prior to the TAG event.
After the orbit departure maneuver, the spacecraft executes two additional burns (Fig. 13):
the checkpoint burn places the spacecraft on a descent trajectory to the asteroid surface, and
the matchpoint burn matches the asteroid rotation rate and establishes the slow descent to
the surface. Shortly after successful execution of the matchpoint burn, the spacecraft initiates a departure maneuver and returns to orbit. As with the previous rehearsal, the spacecraft
downlinks telemetry to assess that all events occurred within acceptable bounds. After positive confirmation of a successful matchpoint rehearsal, the mission can proceed to TAG.
TAG TAG occurs in July 2020, and it follows the sequence of events of the prior two rehearsals, except that after the matchpoint burn, the spacecraft continues to the surface of the
asteroid. During that final approach to the surface, the spacecraft uses the GN&C lidars or
NFT to monitor that the range and velocity are within an acceptable corridor, and to prepare
for the sampling sequence. After a short duration of confirmed contact with the asteroid
surface, the high-purity nitrogen gas is released from one of the TAGSAM bottles, mobilizing surface materials under the TAGSAM head where they are captured. Five seconds after
release of the sample gas, the spacecraft executes a back-away maneuver to move to a safe
distance from the asteroid.
Sample Mass Verification Once the spacecraft reaches a safe distance from the asteroid,
a braking burn halts the relative separation between the spacecraft and Bennu. From this
station, the spacecraft conducts two investigations to evaluate the collected mass.
The first investigation is an imaging campaign during which the TAGSAM arm places
the head in the sun in a small number of attitudes. Thermal modeling of the head, and
regolith in the head, suggests there is a risk to the 75°C maximum temperature requirement
for certain head attitudes relative to the Sun at solar ranges < 1.15 AU; there are fewer
geometric restrictions but some still exist to < 1.25 AU, and beyond that range any head
attitude relative to the Sun should maintain the sample to < 75°C. TAG nominally occurs in
July 2020, when the solar range is > 1.15 AU but < 1.25 AU—and at this time Bennu and
the spacecraft are still moving from perihelion to aphelion (i.e., away from the sun). For solar
ranges between 1.15 AU and 1.25 AU, the Sun can shine on the TAGSAM “side,” where the
side is defined as the cylindrical portion housing the screen mesh. Angles that tilt the head
up to 30° toward the Sun do not violate the max temperature. Thus the post-TAG imaging
includes orienting the head edge-on to the Sun, as well as a slight tilt toward the Sun. In this
configuration it is possible to see what material was collected in the contact pads, and assess
the state of the TAGSAM head that had initial contact with the asteroid. Experiments on the
ground demonstrate that sample mass inside the collection volume should be visible if the
Sun has an opportunity to illuminate the collection volume, which these geometries allow.
If the imaging occurs at solar ranges > 1.25 AU, any head orientation relative to the sun
preserves the temperature limit. This evaluation is qualitative in terms of sample mass, so
another technique is necessary to evaluate the collected mass relative to the required amount.
To determine the mass of collected sample, the spacecraft implements a delta-momentof-inertia technique (May et al. 2014). Prior to sample collection, while in orbit, the spacecraft conducts a series of slow spins with the arm extended. There are two spins, both about
the z-axis. The first extends the arm along the +z axis, the second extends the arm along the
−x axis (Fig. 14). These provide a baseline measurement of the spacecraft angular momentum without any sample. After sample collection, the spacecraft repeats the spin sequences.
The change in moment of inertia is a direct measurement of the sample mass. Specifically,

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go Sample. . .

Page 19 of 46

107

Fig. 14 Sample mass measurement configurations. The spacecraft performs a rotation about the +z axis
before and after sample collection. The change in the moment of inertia is a direct measurement of the
sample mass

Fig. 15 (a) On the left is a model of the spacecraft, with an inset simulating the StowCam FOV during
insertion of TAGSAM into the SRC. (b) On the right is an image from StowCam taken after launch; the SRC
remains closed until the TAGSAM head has collected sample

with known reaction wheel inertias, the wheel speeds to achieve target spin rates enables
solving for inertia. The change in inertia before and after sample collection is a measurement of sample mass. This technique eliminated the need to add extra instrumentation to
assess the sample mass.
SRC Stowage After confirmation of the required sample mass, the arm inserts the
TAGSAM head into the SRC, and the arm is detached from the TAGSAM head. The righthand image in Fig. 4 shows the TAGSAM capture ring, which is the fixture in the SRC that
mates to the TAGSAM head. Once inserted into the capture ring, latches hold the TAGSAM
head in the SRC. An engineering camera, known as “StowCam,” is positioned to view the
insertion of TAGSAM head into the open SRC. Figure 15 shows (i) a simulated view of the
StowCam during the stowage event, as well as (ii) a view from the SamCam of the SRC
taken after launch (the SRC remains closed until the TAGSAM head is ready to be stowed).
After the SRC is confirmed to be closed, the spacecraft enters a quiescent operational period
that lasts until the departure burn for the return-to-Earth trajectory.
Multiple Sampling Attempts The OSIRIS-REx flight system and TAGSAM carry the
requirement to support up to three sampling attempts. The multiple-attempt capability pro-

107

Page 20 of 46

E.B. Bierhaus et al.

vides resiliency in the event that the first sample collection event fails. There are three independent gas bottles to support the three events. The entire flight system has the resources
(fuel, schedule margin, operational lifetime, etc.) to support these additional attempts.
Return Cruise Return cruise starts March 2021, when the spacecraft executes a departure burn from Bennu. The subsequent trajectory returns the spacecraft to near-Earth space,
with spacecraft closest-approach and a daytime return of the SRC on September 24, 2023.
Small maneuvers, in the months leading up to Earth return, refine the trajectory to achieve
the precise targeting necessary to deliver the SRC to the landing site at the Utah Test and
Training Range (UTTR). Several hours before Earth encounter, the spacecraft releases the
SRC, then executes a small burn to raise the Earth closest-approach of the spacecraft to 250
km. At this point, the spacecraft and SRC are on separate trajectories: the spacecraft passes
by Earth to remain in a heliocentric orbit, while the SRC enters the Earth’s atmosphere to
land in UTTR.
The SRC enters the atmosphere at 12.2 km/s. The vast majority of the deceleration occurs
via atmospheric friction on the SRC heatshield, which protects the sample inside the capsule.
After peak heating, the SRC will have a gentle parachute landing in the Utah desert.
The recovery team transports the SRC to a temporary processing facility in UTTR, and
prepares the sample canister for immediate shipment to the long-term storage facility at
the Johnson Space Center where it is opened. The Preliminary Examination Team (PET)
conducts an initial assessment of the returned sample, distributing some material to the
OSIRIS-REx science team for immediate study and inventory in preparation for proposals
by scientists around the world for analysis of the material. Seventy-five percent of the sample
is reserved for study by future generations of scientists using new analysis techniques.

4 TAGSAM
TAGSAM is the product of LM internal research and development activities that explored
a wide variety of techniques to sample the surfaces of small bodies. Clark et al. (2016)
summarize the development effort of TAGSAM through the end of the New Frontiers 3
Concept Study Report for OSIRIS-REx. Here we focus on the activities and results from
the start of mission development (Phase B), though first we provide a short summary of the
TAGSAM design, and the advantages afforded by the gas-driven sample collection.

4.1 Overview
TAGSAM was one of several approaches Lockheed Martin initially considered for sampling
planetary regoliths as part of a larger architectural trade to maximize overall simplicity and
reliability for small body sampling. “Landing” on a small body requires the spacecraft to
provide functionality that otherwise is inherent when landing in regoliths on planetary bodies with appreciable surface gravity—maintaining contact with the surface and a preferred
orientation requires thrusters or anchors on a small body, and these techniques are sensitive to the specific properties of the generally poorly constrained mechanical properties of
the target body. An alternative was a so-called touch-and-go (TAG) design, which involves
a brief contact between the spacecraft and small body. After the sample is obtained, the
spacecraft quickly retreats to a safe position away from the body. A TAG architecture minimizes the contact time, reduces sample handling complexity in the proximity of the surface,
reduces the variability of thermal states when in contact with the object, and avoids the

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go Sample. . .

Page 21 of 46

107

Fig. 16 The TAGSAM assembly consists of an arm, gas bottles, and the TAGSAM head, which is stowed
in a launch container until arrival at Bennu. (a) The left-hand image shows qualification hardware, with
labels identifying the major components of the arm. (b) The right-hand image shows the qual hardware in
preparation for a vibration test; the head is inside the launch container

need to ensure long-term communications to Earth while on the surface. Ultimately the gasdriven approach proved superior, resulting in TAGSAM as the reference design. Extensive
IRAD-supported LM testing, occurring over several years, included ground-based testing
and two reduced-gravity campaigns on parabolic aircraft flights (Clark et al. 2016). These
tests evaluated collection performance as a function of material type and grain sizes, demonstrating significant collection capability in a wide variety of materials and surface gravities,
including 1-g at the Earth’s surface and near zero-g experienced during the parabolic airplane flights. Upon selection of OSIRIS-REx for Phase B, we initiated a test campaign that
optimized the existing, extensive capability of TAGSAM for sample collection at Bennu.
These tests included additional ground-testing (e.g., in the laboratory) and two additional
reduced-gravity campaigns. We describe these tests here.
The complete TAGSAM design consists of (Figs. 3 and 16): an arm with telescoping
spring; three pressurized bottles containing curation-grade nitrogen gas with a small amount
of helium (to check leaks prior to launch); the sample collection “head”; a u-joint between
the arm and the head that allows the contact plane of the head to comply with any residual angle difference (i.e., tilt) between the head and the local surface; and a container that
houses the head (the right-hand image of Fig. 16) during launch and cruise to the asteroid
to maintain cleanliness during final ground processing, launch, and initial spacecraft outgassing. The centerlines of all TAGSAM components, and the SRC, reside in essentially the
same plane, simplifying alignment between the launch, sampling, and SRC stowage geometries (Fig. 3). There are three “joints” in the arm: a shoulder, which is the attach point to
the spacecraft; an elbow, located at half the arm length; and a wrist, which is the interface
between the arm and the sample head (Fig. 16). These joints enable the arm to position the
head for operational activities, including the sample collection, sample-mass measurement,
and other post-TAG assessment activities. There are three pressurized gas bottles (N2 bottles
in Fig. 16), which are independently released, to support up to three sampling attempts. The
launch container cover (the right-hand image of Fig. 16) is ejected, and the TAGSAM head
extracted, during the final approach phase to Bennu in October, 2018.

107

Page 22 of 46

E.B. Bierhaus et al.

Fig. 17 (a) The left-hand image is a TAGSAM engineering development unit (EDU). The u-joint allows
the contact plane of the head to comply with the surface during initial contact with the regolith. The screen
mesh is on the outside circumference of the sample chamber, allowing the sample gas to escape but trapping
asteroid material. (b) A schematic of TAGSAM operation. Gas flows from source bottles to the head, which
creates a directed flow in the regolith. Like wind blowing sand, the gas mobilizes surface material, carrying
it into the collection volume. Figure after Clark et al. 2016

For the sample collection event, the arm positions the head along the center of mass of
the spacecraft, at ∼3 m from the plane of the science deck (Fig. 1). At contact, the spring in
the arm (indicated as “compression section” in Fig. 16) mitigates contact dynamics between
the spacecraft and asteroid at contact. A series of triggers, including a microswitch in the
arm and monitoring the accelerations measured in the inertial measurement unit, collaborate
to define when the spacecraft achieves contact with the surface. Once the triggers declare
contact with the asteroid, the computer initiates the gas release, which marks the start of the
collection phase. To support the TAG architecture, the design emphasized maximum collection in minimum time. The majority of the gas release occurs in 5 sec, and ground-based
testing (Fig. 24) demonstrates TAGSAM collects the required mass (using unconsolidated
sedimentary materials as listed in Table 6?) in < 1 sec on Earth, providing confidence the
required sample mass will be collected rapidly at Bennu’s regolith.
The exterior geometry of TAGSAM head (Fig. 17) is a short, wide cylinder that is cylindrically symmetrical except for two gas tubes (that branch from the single feed line) that
deliver gas to the TAGSAM contact surface. The configuration is similar to a brimmed hat,
where the brim comprises the contact surface, and the volume above contains the collection
region that holds the regolith from the asteroid. This rationale for this geometry is multifold:
first, it is stable; second, the volume provides significant margin for material in the event of a
low bulk-density; and third, it fits within the volume of the Stardust heritage SRC, providing
significant cost savings and development time compared with an entirely new capsule design. The bulk of TAGSAM is made of aluminum alloy, and includes a stainless-steel screen
mesh (38 micron openings), stainless-steel fasteners, and Mylar flap that assists in retaining
the regolith after collection (Fig. 17). These materials were selected because of their long
use in curating lunar samples without introducing contamination.
Figure 17(b) illustrates the basic sampling process of TAGSAM. When sample gas is
released from a high-pressure bottle, the gas flows through a feedline to the head and is
directed into the regolith via an annular aperture. The gas mobilizes material underneath the
head as the gas expands into the regolith. The flange seal and impedance of the soil bed
cause the gas naturally to flow from the high-pressure environment underneath the head to
the vacuum of space via the collection volume around the perimeter of the head. A screen
around the perimeter of TAGSAM retains asteroid regolith, even as the gas escapes.
TAGSAM is required to collect 150 g of sample. This value exceeds the 60 g science
requirement because of the resolution of the measurement technique used to determine the

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go Sample. . .

Page 23 of 46

107

Fig. 18 A computer-generated
image of the TAGSAM head,
with a call-out box indicating the
position of a picture showing the
contact pads around the bottom
of TAGSAM. The 24 contact
pads are evenly distributed
around the entire perimeter

collected mass. By collecting 150 g, TAGSAM ensures that the measured value (via the
change in spacecraft moment of inertia) will be at least 60 g. Clark et al. (2016) describe a
broad suite of testing that evaluated collection performance given a variety of regolith types.
In general, TAGSAM efficiently collects fine-grained material, such as lunar regolith. The
maximum mass collected in any TAGSAM test is ∼1.9 kg of the Johnson Space Center
lunar simulant, JSC-1. Testing with coarse-grained gravel demonstrated collected mass well
in excess of 150 g in reduced-gravity conditions (i.e., the parabolic airplane flights); in addition, the parabolic flights demonstrated that collection performance increases by a factor of
4–5 between ground-based tests and an equivalent test in reduced-gravity conditions (Clark
et al. 2016). The early phases of testing included continuous size-frequency distributions
(SFDs), as well as bimodal SFDs (i.e., sand and gravel-sized particles). The presence of
appreciable small-diameter material enhanced the collection of larger grains. Subsequent
testing, described in Sects. 4.4 and 4.5, expanded the types of materials and the conditions
of collection; TAGSAM exceeds the collection requirement in a variety of material types
and conditions, including cases with obstacles underneath the head.

4.2 Contact Pads
In addition to the bulk sample collection, TAGSAM also will collect material in contact
pads. The goal of the contact pads is to collect the immediate surface material of Bennu, in
particular the material that is the surface layer that reflects sunlight, and thus is the medium
that generates the asteroid’s observed reflectance spectrum seen by ground-based telescopes.
This goal is codified in a Level 1 requirement for the mission that requires the spacecraft
“contact ≥26 cm2 of surface material from Bennu and return the TAGSAM contact surface
and archive 75% for future analyses.”
The TAGSAM head carries circular 24-contact pads, each of which has an exposed diameter of ∼1.75 cm, corresponding to 4.43 cm2 per pad, and 57.42 cm2 total contact-pad
area (Fig. 18). The contact pads are distributed around the outer perimeter of the contact
surface. Each contact pad is the “loop” side of a metal Velcro (Fig. 19), which proved to
be the material that balances the collection of small particles on the one hand, yet resists
collecting larger particles that might interfere with stowage in the SRC.
The contact pads went through a two-stage evaluation. The first stage was an assessment
by the science team based on the criteria listed Table 2. The second stage was an assessment
by the engineering team to ensure that the proposed contact pad could be manufactured and

107

Page 24 of 46

E.B. Bierhaus et al.

Fig. 19 A flight-like contact pad. The loop side of metal Velcro (dark brown) is spot welded onto a disk,
which is mounted in the TAGSAM head
Table 2 The science-team evaluation criteria for contact pad material
Top-level evaluation criteria that must be met before consideration as a candidate material:
Pad materials must be able to pass Contamination Control cleaning protocols as determined by the
contamination control working group.
The composition of the pad material must not pose a contamination threat to the sample itself (i.e.,
mineralogical similarities, leaching, shedding, etc.), as determined by the sample working group.
After admitted for testing, the following criteria were used to compare and rank candidate materials:
The pad materials must resist collection of particles that are larger than 6 mm.
Pad materials must not fail under normal or shear stresses induced mechanically or by sample–gas dynamics.
Total volume of sample collected.
Grain size range of sample collected.
Ability to retain sample through g-forces (during sampling phase and atmospheric reentry inside SRC).
Ability to differentiate between a surface particle and a bulk particle.
Ease of sample extraction.

incorporated into the TAGSAM head by existing manufacture and processing protocols, and
that particles collected by the contact pads would not represent a risk to safe stowage of the
TAGSAM head in the SRC.

4.2.1 Science-Team Evaluation
The OSIRIS-REx science team’s Regolith Development Working Group (RDWG) led the
science-team assessment of the contact pads. The RDWG solicited the entire science team
for candidate contact pad materials. Seventeen candidate materials were received, from simple aluminum foil to alloy microlattices. Of the original candidate materials, six candidates
“survived” initial screening defined by sample-science considerations (composition, compliance to cleaning protocols) to proceed to testing: reticulated aluminum foam, aluminum
foil, steel wool, stainless-steel Velcro, indium, and alloy microlattices. Of those six, three
candidate materials proved to be “high-performing” candidates: steel wool, stainless-steel
Velcro (loop side), and indium.
Indium proved to be a versatile candidate because the material is soft enough to allow a
wide variety of textured patterns—increasing surface texture increases the available surface
area and thus improves contact with an irregular surface. Several different textured patterns
were evaluated, including a flat surface, a “waffle” pattern, slots, holes (Fig. 20), and spirals.
Indium proved to be the most effective material for particle collection, across particle sizes
from 500 microns to 3 mm. Some configurations collected particle sizes up to 1 cm, which
represented a risk to safe stowage and were eliminated. Flat surface, and 1-mm-holed indium

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go Sample. . .

Page 25 of 46

107

Fig. 20 A prototype indium
contact pad with 1-mm holes

pads were included in a reduced-gravity flight. These tests demonstrated that these surface
types collect and retain particles that span the expected surface distribution, but were not as
efficient in collecting larger particles.
At the end of the science-team evaluation of contact pad material, the following candidates were passed on to the engineering team: medium-fiber stainless-steel wool, loop-side
stainless-steel Velcro, 1-mm-holed indium, and flat-surface indium.

4.2.2 Spacecraft-Team Evaluation
The spacecraft-team testing focused on engineering considerations and mission safety. After
receiving the recommendations from the science team, and after preliminary analysis, the
spacecraft team concluded that two candidates should move forward: the indium and metal
Velcro. The stainless-steel wool presented a number of challenges in cleaning, fabrication,
and particle shedding. Subsequent assessment of indium demonstrated an ability to collect
and retain particles larger than the maximum safe size, even in Earth-gravity conditions,
and indium was eliminated. Stainless-steel Velcro (loop side) thus became the contact-pad
material that underwent a test program to ensure its viability to meet science, safety, and
implementation constraints.
The spacecraft team developed a test plan that included variations in contact velocity,
regolith sizes and compositions, angle to surface, and horizontal translation speed at the
time of contact. In addition to variation of those parameters, test execution included 48
contact pads, each dropped three times, for a total of 144 tests.
The test was a bench-top fixture consisting of a weighted drop head containing the contact pad and a translating bed of regolith material (Fig. 21). When the weighted head was
released, it actuated a timer switch and dropped into the regolith bed; the timer switch then
lifted the head from the regolith bed using pneumatic cylinders after the established incontact dwell time on the regolith. A DC electric actuator with 50.8 cm of travel was used to
translate the bed up to several cm/s to simulate varying horizontal velocities of the head at
time of contact. The regolith bed was approximately 7.6 cm deep ×30.5 cm wide ×91.4 cm
long. The regolith bed holds approximately 19 liters of material when full.
For each test, a contact pad was installed into the drop head (Fig. 21). The drop head
included both a ±15° rotation relative to vertical (as a proxy for the u-joint between the
TAGSAM arm and head), and a mechanism that allowed the head to rotate after contact
(within the ±15° bounds). This test setup represented a conservative condition for embedding a particle into the contact pad: the surface area of the drop head was significantly
smaller (∼7%) than the area of the TAGSAM contact area; thus the pressures at contact are
an average over 14× larger for the contact pads during the tests than they will be for flight.

107

Page 26 of 46

E.B. Bierhaus et al.

Fig. 21 The contact-pad evaluation test setup. The left-hand image shows a contact pad mounted in the drop
head. The right-hand image shows the test frame that houses the drop fixture (that holds the drop head and
contact pad) and the regolith bed. Tests included both stationary and translating regolith beds
Table 3 Summary of collected
particles, whose sizes approach
the safety threshold, from contact
pad testing

Size fraction and material

Number of particles collected
by the contact pad

1.70 mm–3.35 mm, basalt

5

3.35 mm–6.30 mm, basalt

1

1.70 mm–3.35 mm, TLS

7

3.35 mm–6.30 mm, TLS

0

The regolith material used for the testing was the crushed basalt and Tagish Lake Simulant (TLS) described in Sect. 4.4. We tested two size fractions: 1.70 mm–3.35 mm and
3.35 mm–6.30 mm. The simulants were sieved with an electric shaker (5 minutes/batch)
into the size fractions. Recall that the objective of these tests was to ensure the contact-pad
design was capable of collecting particles yet did not compromise spacecraft safety. Thus
these tests focused on larger particles. Visual inspection for collected particles focused on
sizes that could compromise spacecraft safety, and did not examine smaller particles.
Of the 144 tests, 13 tests collected and retained particles that approached the safety
threshold (Table 3). Twelve of the collected particles were in the 1.70 mm–3.35 mm size
fraction, and one of the collected particles was in the 3.35 mm–6.30 mm size fraction. Of
the twelve in the 1.70 mm–3.35 mm size fraction, five were basalt particles and seven were
TLS particles. Because of the rarity of the 3.35 mm–6.30 mm size fraction collection (one
out of 144 tests, or 0.7%), in conjunction with the overtest of dynamics, the metal Velcro
loop material was deemed an acceptable material from a safety perspective.

4.3 Flight Witness Plates
Materials and substances present on a returned witness plate could be from the spacecraft,
from Bennu, or from a source to which the witness plate was exposed but the sample was
not.

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go Sample. . .

Page 27 of 46

107

Fig. 22 The locations of the
witness plates described in
Table 4. The top row shows the
locations of witness plates on the
sample head; the witness plates
identified by b) are exposed after
the TAGSAM head is inserted in
the SRC and the arm is separated.
The bottom row shows the
locations of witness plates inside
the SRC

Multiple exposures of witness plates assist in isolating the source(s) of contaminant
species. The comparison of these plates provides the most complete picture of the environment the sample experienced after collection from the surface of the asteroid. Multiple
witness plates will assist in isolating the source(s) of contaminant species. Analysis of all
witness plates provides the most comprehensive assessment of contamination; however, the
presence of multiple plates in multiple locations provides redundancy, and analysis of any
one plate has value: if a particular plate is compromised, the others still provide valuable
data.
The flight witness plates will observe three time periods: (1) before the sample is acquired, (2) the time between sample acquisition and sample stowage, and (3) sample stowage
through Earth return. Four groups of witness plates cover these time periods, two groups associated with the TAGSAM head and wrist, and two groups inside the SRC. Figure 22 and
Table 4, respectively, illustrate the position of witness plate groups on the spacecraft and
their exposure periods. See Dworkin et al. (2017) for more discussion on the selection of
witness plate materials, which were derived from Stardust experience.
There are two types of witness plate materials, aluminum and sapphire, enabling independent and complementary analyses on the returned plates. The plates are different thicknesses
to support post-return identification of location on the flight vehicle, and are scored on one
side to indicate which side was exposed. All witness plates will be catalogued as part of the
archived materials available to support future research.

4.4 Simulants Used in Testing TAGSAM
Clark et al. (2016) summarize the initial test materials used to evaluate TAGSAM collection.
Prior to the Japanese Hayabusa mission imaging from asteroid Itokawa (Miyamoto et al.
2007), we tested a number of fine-grained materials, consistent with the regoliths seen on the
Moon, Mars, and inferred from earlier spacecraft encounters with other small bodies (e.g.,
Phobos and Deimos, Eros). The very highest-resolution imaging from Hayabusa, however,
suggests that the “smooth” regions on Itokawa at low resolution may consist of regolith that
is deficient in fine-grained material (i.e., particles sizes smaller than a few mm). Multiple,
independent measurements of the particle size-frequency distribution (SFD) on these images

107

Page 28 of 46

E.B. Bierhaus et al.

Table 4 Flight witness plate information
Name of
witness plate

Material type

Location & area

Mission exposure time

A

Aluminum & sapphire

TAGSAM (no screen); 10.1 cm2
of each material type

Open prior to asteroid
sampling

B

Aluminum & sapphire

TAGSAM—Under wrist joint
(with screen on 1/2); 26.7 cm2
total area

Open after capture by
SRC

C

Aluminum & sapphire

TAGSAM (with screen on 1/2);
10.1 cm2 of each material type

Always exposed

1

Aluminum & sapphire

SRC—Near hinge line as part of
mechanism (no screen); 5.2 cm2
total area

Exposed until SRC
opens to receive
TAGSAM head

2

Aluminum & sapphire

SRC—Near hinge line as part of
mechanism (with screen on
1/2); 5.2 cm2 total area

Exposed after SRC
opens to receive
TAGSAM head

3

Aluminum & sapphire

SRC—(with screen on 1/2); 5.2
cm2 total area

Always exposed

of Itokawa surface (available on NASA’s PDS Small Bodies Node, curtesy of JAXA) found
the particle sizes roughly follow a cumulative power law, N = kD −b , where N is the number
of objects with diameter Dand larger, and k and b are constants found by fitting the data.
For the Itokawa Muses-C region, b is about 2.5 (Fig. 23). Because there are only a few
of the highest-resolution images, there is uncertainty in whether these data are localized or
represent the broader nature of this region on the asteroid.
Practical considerations in preparing and maintaining soil test beds make it desirable
to restrict the size range for the most-utilized distribution to be between 3 mm and 25 mm.
Smaller particles tend to become redistributed to lower horizons in the bed, unless numerous
precautions are taken in its preparation. To simulate the inferred size distribution of Itokawa
but provide a practical working medium, we deleted particles below a sieve opening of
3 mm but increased the proportions of the remaining smaller particles relative to larger ones
(Table 5).
We use a number to specify the smallest diameter particle, and a letter to specify the
largest diameter particle. In this nomenclature, our standard SFD is the “7-series,” so-called
because the number 7 corresponds to a ∼0.32 cm minimum particle size, consistent with
the possible absence of fines on Itokawa, and consistent with the predicted presence of mmsized grains on Bennu (Nolan et al. 2013; Emery et al. 2014). We used several different
maximum particle sizes, corresponding to “7c,” “7d,” and “7e” (Table 5). Because Earth
gravity limits the mobility of larger particles, with realistic densities, our standard for most
ground testing is 7c. However, we have performed both ground and reduced-acceleration
testing with larger sizes.
A natural process that occurs in any geologic material, when moved or mixed or otherwise energized, is the generation of fines. The process of scooping, sieving, mixing, pouring, and sampling causes particles to grind together, sometimes breaking particles apart in
weaker materials, and always generating fines even in the stronger material (i.e., basalt).
Thus in any sampling event, there were particles smaller than the minimum size of the
source distribution, from mm-sized particles down to dust.
In addition to the material SFD, the composition and structure of the simulant plays a role
in the fidelity of the testing. We tested a wide variety of material types to determine the col-

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go Sample. . .

Page 29 of 46

107

Fig. 23 The upper-left image is from the Hayabusa mission to asteroid Itokawa, showing two basic textures
visible at the global scale: one is rough, due to large rocks and boulders resting on the surface; the other
is smooth at this scale. The upper-right image is from a shape model of Itokawa, from roughly the same
view as in the upper-left. The arrowed red squares are the location of the images in the lower-left, which
are high-resolution views of the Muses-C region (the smooth region seen in the upper-left image). At high
resolution, the Muses-C surface consists of a range of particle sizes with a cumulative power-law exponent
of −2.5 (see the plot in the lower right). Close examination of the high-resolution images suggests that fines
may be absent in Muses-C

lection efficiency as a function of shape and particle density. Earlier test materials included
lunar simulant, mortar mix, vermiculite, sand, popcorn, peanuts, and chopped rubber. For
realistic particle densities that spanned the range of possible densities on Bennu, we converged on two reference simulant types: a crushed basalt, procured from Hazen Research
Inc., and Tagish Lake Simulant (TLS), a simulant developed by OSIRIS-REx Co-I Alan
Hildebrand (Univ. of Calgary) specifically to mimic the mechanical properties of the Tagish Lake meteorite (Hildebrand et al. 2006). The Tagish Lake meteorite is a carbonaceous
chondrite with properties we suspect will be similar to those we find at Bennu. Table 6 summarizes the average bulk and particle densities of the basalt and TLS simulants. We used
these two simulants for TAGSAM verification tests and for the majority of the collection
tests. However, specialized test campaigns did utilize other materials.
Variation of particles, size, orientations, etc. result in natural scatter of sampling results;
thus we run multiple collections for each set of test conditions both to ensure repeatability
and to bound the expected range of collection performance for a given test case. Successful
collection with the wide range of simulant types, particle sizes, and test conditions provides
confidence in the face of uncertain conditions on Bennu’s surface.

4.5 Ground Testing
Clark et al. (2016) summarize the testing done during the early development of TAGSAM.
In brief, that testing demonstrated the broad capability of gas-driven sampling of planetary

107

Page 30 of 46

Table 5 (a) The size bins, and
% by mass, that constitute the
“7-series” SFD, similar to
observations of the Muses-C
region on asteroid Itokawa. Sieve
sizes from standard geologic
sieves. (b) Alternative
configuration to Table 5(b): we
defer to editor’s preference
whether or not both English and
SI units are used, or just SI

E.B. Bierhaus et al.
(a)
inches

cm

% by mass

min

max

min

max

Mix 7c

Mix 7d

Mix 7e

1/8

1/4

0.318

0.635

43%

38%

31%

1/4

3/8

0.635

0.953

24%

21%

18%

3/8

1/2

0.953

1.270

18%

16%

13%

1/2

5/8

1.270

1.588

15%

13%

11%

5/8

3/4

1.588

1.905

0%

11%

9%

3/4

1

1.905

2.540

0%

0%

18%

(b)
Particle diameter (cm)

Standard mixture (wt%)

min

max

Mix 7c

Mix 7d

Mix 7e

0.318

0.635

43%

38%

31%

0.635

0.953

24%

21%

18%

0.953

1.270

18%

16%

13%

1.270

1.588

15%

13%

11%

1.588

1.905

0%

11%

9%

1.905

2.540

0%

0%

18%

Table 6 Average particle and bulk densities for the two reference simulants
Material

Particle density [g/cm3 ]

Bulk density [g/cm3 ]

Crushed basalt

3.0

1.5

Tagish Lake Simulant (TLS)

1.6

1.0

regoliths in a wide variety of materials. Materials included lunar simulant, martian simulant,
mortar mix, sand, and the basalt and TLS mixes described in Sect. 4.4. Here we describe
the ground testing, with emphasis on the most recent tests that reflect the TAGSAM final
design on the spacecraft, including bottle size and pressure. We divide the ground tests into
two categories: (i) pre-verification tests, which explored different materials and collection
conditions; and (ii) verification tests, i.e., those tests that formally demonstrated TAGSAM
meets the requirements defined by the OSIRIS-REx project.

4.5.1 Pre-verification Testing
The pre-verification testing addressed several parameters that are fundamental to both
the architecture of the TAG design—namely, collecting sample within a small number of
seconds—and our ability to approximate testing performance at Bennu while testing in Earth
gravity and the state of knowledge of the regolith particle sizes.
Collected Mass as a Function of Collection Time The TAG architecture requires that
sample collection occur in a short period of time; simulations of the TAG event indicate that
collection time (the time between the gas fire and departure from the surface) is as short as

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go Sample. . .

Page 31 of 46

107

Fig. 24 Collection results for basalt 7c as a function of collection time for the no-obstruction geometry
(head flat against the surface). The scatter in collected mass for a given time is typical because of natural
variation of the regolith bed at the time of collection. The nominal collection time is 5 s; a very hard surface
or other conditions could result in shorter collection times. These data demonstrate TAGSAM exceeds the
150 g requirement for collections times as short as 0.5 s

∼2 s for a very hard surface, up to ∼8 s for a soft surface. The nominal sample collection
time at Bennu is about 5 seconds. Because of the uncertainty in the nature of the surface
and contact dynamics, we explored collected mass as a function of time. Figure 24 plots
collected mass as a function of collection time, including the nominal five seconds; the tests
focused on collection times shorter than the nominal collection time. We ran two tests at
each contact time for 0.5 s, 1 s, 2 s, and 3 s. These tests illustrate that TAGSAM exceeds the
150 g collection requirement even if off-nominal conditions lead to short collection times.
The difference in collected mass for a given time illustrates the natural variability inherent
in the regolith bed between tests—even though the material is the same between tests, the
number of particles and their size, orientation, and relationship with neighboring particles
will be different between tests. However, the trend to increased collected mass is clear across
collection times, and all collected masses exceed the 150 g requirement.
Simulating Low-Gravity Through Low-Density Simulants Ground-based Earth testing
has, of course, an ever-present gravitational acceleration of 9.8 m/s2 , which is about 105
larger than the gravitational environment at Bennu. Thus the weight of particles of realistic
materials in Earth’s gravity is larger than an equivalent particle’s weight on Bennu’s surface.
In addition to reduced-gravity airplane flights, we conducted ground-based testing using
low-density materials. The low-density materials are a means to evaluate weight effects
for sample collection, allowing us to test collection efficiency when the particle weight is
closer to the weight of the particles at Bennu. The use of low-density materials creates a
different mismatch between the test conditions and the actual collection because low-density
materials do not match the inertia of actual geologic materials. However, our existing data
demonstrate that the sample gas force dominates particle inertia during the first few seconds
of gas release. Basalt, which has a higher particle density than expected for Bennu regolith,
is easily mobilized in Earth’s gravity by the TAGSAM gas. This means the drag force on
a basalt particle is greater than the weight force of that particle in Earth’s gravity. In other
words, the sampling gas has sufficient energy to mobilize particles with realistic inertias
even in 1 g, demonstrating that the initial collection dynamics (the first few seconds of
gas flow) are not dominated by the inertia of realistic particle densities. Thus the use of
low-density materials is appropriate to evaluate low-weight collection performance in Earth
gravity. Perlite is a low-bulk-density, ∼0.1 g/cm3 , readily available natural material that can

107

Page 32 of 46

E.B. Bierhaus et al.

Fig. 25 Low-density materials used to simulate low-weight asteroid regolith. (a) The left-hand image is a
picture of perlite in one of the test chambers after a collection test; the post-sampling divot is visible. (b) The
right-hand image is the TAGSAM head resting on a “regolith bed” of exclusively 2.5 cm plastic hollow
spheres in a deep wire mesh container (housed in a vacuum chamber); this set up was to minimize the gas
impedance into the regolith and thus represent a challenging collection scenario

be sieved to form different SFDs. We used perlite as a proxy for low-weight asteroid regolith
(Fig. 25).
Figure 26 plots the collected volume (rather than collected mass) of basalt, TLS, and
perlite. The perlite was sieved to approximately match the 7c distribution (Table 5) and
was under-dense in the largest particles. Several important trends emerge from these data.
First, reduced weight (which is equivalent to reduced bulk density) corresponds to increased
collected volume (Fig. 26). This is true for both the “no-gap” cases (in which the head is
flat against the surface) and the “5-cm obstacle” cases (when there is a 5-cm obstacle under
one side of the head, causing the head to be tilted with respect to the plane of the regolith
surface). Second, the obstacle reduces the collected volume for basalt and TLS, but not for
perlite. It is not clear whether this is a weight effect or inertial effect, or a combination
of both. The decreased weight makes the material easier to mobilize for longer periods of
time; this will be true for the material on Bennu. The decreased inertia makes the perlite
more compliant to the flow fields of the gas, which may not be representative of material
with higher inertia. Thus if an initial trajectory for a particle sends it through the gap, rather
than into the head, that particle will not be collected. Nevertheless, the trend for improved
collection at lower weight supports effective sample collection at Bennu. The data points are
individual tests; the solid lines connect the averages for each test condition—the thick line
connects the averages for the no-gap cases, and the thin line connects the averages for the
5-cm obstacle cases. Collected volume increases by over 60% between the higher-density
basalt and the low-density perlite for the no-gap cases, and increases ∼570% between the
basalt and perlite for the 5-cm obstacle cases. Thus the reduced-weight conditions at Bennu
should correlate with increased collection.
Collecting Larger Particles As described in Sect. 4.4, there were scientific and practical
considerations that led to the selection of particle sizes included in the test material. Highresolution images of the Muses-C region on Itokawa (Miyamoto et al. 2008) suggest that
fines may be under-abundant or absent relative to the SFD observed at sizes above ∼1 cm.
In Earth’s gravity the natural size sorting (the “Brazil nut effect”) causes larger particles
to migrate to the top of the regolith bed, creating challenges when seeking a well-mixed
volume of material that covers a wide size range. Furthermore, earlier testing (Clark et al.
2016) demonstrated that TAGSAM is very effective collecting fine-grained material. Thus

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go Sample. . .

Page 33 of 46

107

Fig. 26 The collected volume of basalt, TLS, and low-density simulants. Some materials have somewhat
different collection conditions (see text for details). The test data demonstrate that as weight decreases, collected volume increases. The thick black line connects the average collection for the no-gap cases. The thin
black line connects the average collection for the 5-cm obstacle collection cases

an important parameter that deserved further exploration is collection of larger particle sizes.
However, this parameter quickly collides with the discrepancy between the gravitational environment on Earth and Bennu. We took a two-pronged approach: (i) test true particle SFDs
with increasing maximum particle size until Earth’s gravity overcomes the mobilization capability of the collection gas, and (ii) use low-density large particles as a proxy for large
regolith particles (with the same considerations of weight vs. inertia described earlier).
Figure 27 plots collection results for basalt 7c, 7d, and 7e (see Table 5 for definitions of
the SFDs). The 7c data point is an average for multiple collection tests. These tests are in
Earth’s gravity, and thus the work done by the gas to mobilize and collect the particles is
much higher than on Bennu. To evaluate collection performance for lower-weight particles,
we used 2.0 cm and 2.5 cm (both values are diameter) plastic hollow spheres (PHS) (Fig. 27).
We tested each size separately, i.e. only 2.0 cm diameter, then only 2.5 cm diameter, as well
as a mixture of the two. The decrease in collection efficiency follows a similar functional
behavior as the basalt results, but at collected volumes over an order-of-magnitude larger.
The single-size PHS tests demonstrate the ability of TAGSAM to collect large grain sizes
without the presence of finer grains that (within cohesion limits) facilitate the mobilization
of larger particles. Scaling the average collected volume of 2.5 cm diameter spheres to a
nominally-expected bulk density of 1 g/cm3 for Bennu material, the collected mass would
be over 160 g, for 2.0 cm diameter spheres the collected mass would be over 400 grams,
and for the mixture (2.0 cm and 2.5 cm spheres) the collected mass would be 270 g. These
tests demonstrate the capacity of TAGSAM to mobilize and ingest particle sizes larger than
the mean sub-cm-sized particles derived from thermal inertia measurements (Emery et al.
2014).
Collected vs. Source SFD Preserving the original SFD of the regolith as it natively exists
on Bennu is not a requirement because of several reasons: the uncertainty associated with
measuring the source SFD with sufficient accuracy at the relevant particle sizes (i.e., the
resolution and coverage requirements would be far more resource-intensive); the challenges

107

Page 34 of 46

E.B. Bierhaus et al.

Fig. 27 Collection results that include larger particle sizes than found in 7c. (a) The left-hand plot shows
collected mass as a function of the maximum particle size in SFDs defined in Table 5. The data point for
7c is an average value. The average collected mass for both 7d and 7e are above the 150 g requirement.
The right-hand plot shows the collected volume for single-size bin basalt materials, as well as the collected
volume for plastic hollow spheres (2 cm diam, 2.5 cm diam, and a mixture of the two diameters). Earth’s
gravity limits the mobilization of the basalt material; the collected volume of the PHS material demonstrates
that TAGSAM can collect material even when particle sizes are exclusively ≥2 cm

Fig. 28 A histogram of the percent of total collected mass as a function of size for the averages over several
tests. Test data shown are for both the head flat against the surface and with a 5-cm obstruction under one side.
All tests used in the averages are for the basalt simulant. The idealized source 7c distribution is included for
reference. As described earlier, the reality of geologic materials results in small amounts of material residing
in size bins slightly larger and slightly smaller than the idealized SFD

associated with preserving the SFD throughout the sample-handling chain (i.e., the unavoidable dynamics associated with atmospheric entry and capsule landing during the return to
Earth); and the source SFD does not trace directly to any of the Level 1 science requirements. Nevertheless, evaluating the returned sample SFD, and correlating with measured
mechanical properties (e.g., tensile and shear strengths) can provide important constraints
on the evolution of regolith on asteroid surfaces. Because we sieve the collected sample after
each TAGSAM test, we can compare the collected SFD with that of the source material to
evaluate whether or not the sampling process biases the collection relative to the original
SFD. As an example, Fig. 28 plots the percentage of collected mass as a function of size bin
for 7c (Table 5), averaged over several collections for the nominal case (head flat against the
surface) and the tilted case (5-cm obstacle under one side of the head). Figure 28 includes
the idealized (“source”) 7c for reference. All tests used the basalt 7c simulant. (The inherent
variability in natural materials results in small amounts of mass in size bins slightly larger

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go Sample. . .

Page 35 of 46

107

Table 7 Parameters that defined the TAGSAM verification collection tests
Particle SFD

7c (see Table 5)

Simulant materials

Basalt, TLS (see Table 6)

Geometries

Head flat, head tilted by 5-cm obstacle under one side

Temperatures

Hot cases, +70 °C; cold cases −80 °C

Note: SFD is the size-frequency distribution, and TLS is Tagish-Lake simulant

and slightly smaller than the idealized SFD.) The results demonstrate that TAGSAM generally preserves the source SFD. The largest discrepancy is in the largest size bin, which
is likely a selection effect caused by the larger weight of these particles in Earth’s gravity
relative to that on Bennu.

4.5.2 Verification Testing
Although we do not know the typical SFD of regolith on Bennu at diameters less than a few
cm, there are several lines of indirect evidence that suggest the surface includes loose, collectable material. The overall shape of Bennu (Nolan et al. 2013), which though not spherical
is compellingly regular for such a small object, suggests that it is a rubble pile; a solid body
would easily withstand the small but persistent gravitational drive to a spherical shape. In
addition, the equatorial ridge suggests the presence of mobile material that moves across
the surface to an energetic minimum (Scheeres et al. 2016). The Bennu radar polarization
ratio (Nolan et al. 2013) is less than Itokawa and Eros, suggesting it is smoother than those
asteroids at scales comparable to the wavelengths of the radar (12.6 cm and 3.5 cm). Finally,
Emery et al. (2014) use Spitzer observations of Bennu at thermal wavelengths to derive a
thermal inertia that is consistent with a surface comprised of a mean particle size less than a
cm. When combined with visible imaging of Itokawa’s Muses-C region that resolves sizes to
near 1 cm, and Bennu’s spectral classification (B-class) and the relationship with the known
properties of carbonaceous meteorites, the OSIRIS-REx team converged on a reference set
of materials, SFDs, and test conditions that defined the verification test set for TAGSAM,
which are summarized in Table 7. The hot and cold temperatures are based on the possible
range of regolith surface temperatures that OSIRIS-REx may sample (hottest at the equator,
coldest near the poles). For the test, the entire TAGSAM head and gas delivery system were
placed into a vacuum chamber with the regolith, and the entire system was driven to hot or
cold temperatures. Although there was thermal control on the gas delivery system, the hot
case corresponds to an increased bottle pressure over the cold case, and as a result the hot
case had higher bottle pressures compared with the cold case. Figure 29 plots the results of
the verification tests. It is important to note that in flight the temperature of the bottles will
be well controlled, and will never be as cold as the cold case from these tests. The bottle
will not be at a low pressure at the time of gas fire, and so the cold case shown in Fig. 29 is
an end-member in that regard. Most importantly, collection exceeded 150 g in all cases.

4.6 Reduced-Gravity Testing
Understanding the dynamics of the regolith in response to gas flow, in a reduced-gravity
environment, is essential to demonstrate the viability of our sample technique. The use of
vacuum chambers in ground tests enabled us to simulate the absence of an atmosphere.
However, a fundamental constraint of ground-based laboratory testing, when approximating

107

Page 36 of 46

E.B. Bierhaus et al.

Fig. 29 Plot of the verification
collection results. The cold TLS,
5-cm obstruction result is nearly
identical to the cold basalt, 5-cm
obstruction result, making the
data point difficult to distinguish
on this plot

asteroid conditions, is the presence of Earth’s gravity. On the Earth’s surface, the weight of
a cm-sized particle is a larger force than the aerodynamic lifting force of flowing gas unless
the wind speeds are high (fortunately, most windy days on Earth do not loft cm-sized gravel
into the air). In contrast, the weight of a 1-cm particle on Bennu is roughly 105 less than
on Earth because Bennu’s surface gravity is 105 less than Earth’s surface gravity, yet the
gas-driven forces remain the same.
To test collection performance in a more “flight-like” environment, we completed a total
of four reduced-gravity flight test campaigns; the first two occurred prior to OSIRIS-REx
selection, and are summarized in Clark et al. (2016). Briefly, the first two flight campaigns
demonstrated that: (1) the basic TAGSAM design exceeds the 150 g sample-mass collection
requirement (collecting up to several hundred grams), (2) the reduced-acceleration conditions during the flights improved collection by 4–5× when compared with the same test in
the 1-g laboratory environment, and (3) that collection improves as the relative fraction of
finer-grained material increases.
Here we describe the third and fourth reduced-gravity flight campaigns, which occurred
in May and October 2012, after OSIRIS-REx was selected as the third New Frontiers mission. The May flight occurred through a NASA program that shares flights among multiple
experiments, while the October flight was dedicated to TAGSAM testing and included a special acceleration profile to provide a low, but always-positive acceleration that we derived
based on the three previous flight campaigns. Table 8 summarizes the objectives of each test
campaign.
Reduced-gravity flights are performed by flying an aircraft in a series of parabolic arcs.
The “reduced-gravity” condition occurs as the plane noses-over the top of the parabola,
during which everything in the plane is in near free fall. In the reference frame of the aircraft
there are minimal accelerations, which mimic the conditions in a low-gravity environment.
But of course, Earth’s gravity is still very present, accelerating the plane rapidly toward the
ground until pull-up from the parabola. Thus the environment in the plane during the nose
over is more accurately described as reduced-acceleration.
Starting with the third flight campaign, in May 2012, we used a new set of five Lockheed
Martin IRAD-developed test chambers (Fig. 30). The five chambers are housed in three
discrete assemblies: one large chamber with interior dimensions measuring 76 cm on a side
(length and width), and two pairs of two smaller chambers measuring 46 cm on a side (length
and width). Previous testing (Clark et al. 2016) demonstrated that sample collection in the
smaller chambers is consistent with that of the larger chamber, mitigating concerns over wall
effects biasing the collection results. The larger chamber enabled us to better evaluate the
dynamics of material in reduced acceleration conditions, in addition to evaluating collection

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go Sample. . .

Page 37 of 46

107

Table 8 Overview of reduced-gravity flight test objectives
Campaign
May 2012

Objective
1. Evaluate collection performance in the presence of increasing maximum particle size
2. Evaluate collection when the head is not flat against a target surface
3. Test the collection performance of a candidate contact pad material
4. Explore regolith dynamics unique to a low-gravity environment
5. Conduct control experiment

October 2012

1. Improve understanding of collection performance in small but always positive
acceleration environment
2. Evaluate collection performance of basalt and TLS 7c
3. Evaluate collection results without and with an obstacle
4. Evaluate collection performance as a function of contact time

Fig. 30 (a) The left-hand photograph is the five chamber configuration on the May 2012 flight series. Chamber 100 is the large chamber, chambers 200–500 are the smaller chambers. (b) The right-hand photograph is
the regolith bed in Chamber 100 (the large chamber, interior dimensions are 76 cm on a side). The material
is basalt

performance. Each chamber has a mobile cover between the TAGSAM head and the regolith
surface. This cover provided a barrier between the regolith and the TAGSAM head before
and after sampling, to ensure material collection only occurred during the collection period
during each test. Each chamber had its own TAGSAM head, which was extended to the
surface and then retracted after a defined time.
The sample collection test sequence is as follows, the sequence represents the events
that take place to test one TAGSAM head during the reduced-acceleration phase of a single
parabola: (1) the NASA flight lead called stable entry into reduced-acceleration conditions;
(2) a test engineer retracted the cover, exposing the TAGSAM head to sample regolith;
(3) another test engineer initiated the downward travel of the head to the surface; (4) after contact with the surface the sampling gas was discharged via a flight-like microswitch
triggered by compression of the arm during contact; (5) after a defined period of time the
head was retracted from the surface, and the cover returned to its starting position, separating the head from the regolith. This was all done in the ∼16–18 s of reduced-acceleration
conditions available during each parabola. The functions of the test personnel were to mimic
the functions of the spacecraft and ensure the regolith and head were kept separate except
during sampling.

107

Page 38 of 46

E.B. Bierhaus et al.

Fig. 31 Collected mass as a
function of the maximum particle
size present in the regolith. (The
minimum particle size was the
same in all tests.) There were
three different test types with 7c:
(i) head flat against surface
(“7c”); (ii) head tilted relative to
surface (“7c, tilted head”),
though see text for actual test
conditions; and large rocks
between the TAGSAM head and
the bulk 7c material (“7c, large
rocks on surface”). The regolith
simulant for these tests was basalt

4.6.1 May 2012 Flights
The May 2012 flight campaign was a part of NASA’s Facilitated Access to the Space Environment for Technology (FAST) opportunity; TAGSAM was one of several experiments
on the plane. There were four flights, with five sample events each flight. Each sampling
event used a distinct chamber (Fig. 30) and sample head. The five TAGSAM heads used
during this test sequence were slightly different than the final flight design, so the results
presented here cannot be directly compared with results of the final design. Nevertheless,
the test results were valuable in understanding the overall behavior of the gas-driven sampling capability of TAGSAM. This test sequence had five objectives, summarized in Table 8
and described in more detail in the following paragraphs.
Objective 1 Evaluate collection performance in the presence of increasing maximum particle size. Earth gravity inhibits the mobility of larger rocks during the sample gas release.
Thus a prime goal of the reduced-acceleration testing was to assess the collection when the
weight of the particles was not dominated by Earth gravity, yet their inertial properties were
still representative of Bennu material. We used three different variations of our 7-series SFD,
for which the maximum particle size varied from ∼1.6 cm to ∼2.5 cm (Table 5).
Figure 31 summarizes the collection results from these tests. We ran four cases of 7c,
three cases of 7d, and four cases of 7e. The collected mass decreases as the maximum
particle size increases, although the smallest collection amount, ∼333 g of 7e, is still more
than twice the minimum sample mass collection requirement of 150 g.
In addition to varying the maximum diameter in the overall SFD, we also ran two cases
in which we placed several-cm-sized rocks (larger than the maximum ingestible diameter of
TAGSAM) on the regolith, in the sampling area of TAGSAM, such that the TAGSAM head
would have to “sample around” the larger rocks (Fig. 32). These tests were distinct from
those in Objective 2 because those tests introduced a tilt of the head relative to the collection
surface. These tests kept the bottom of the head roughly parallel to the plane of the simulated
regolith, with a gap underneath the entire head due to the presence of multiple large rocks.
Because of the acceleration conditions of the flights (see subsequent discussion), the large
rocks in one of the cases shifted prior to sampling, and may have not been true obstructions
during the sampling event. Nevertheless, in the case in which the rocks definitively remained
as obstructions, the collected mass was ∼511 g.
Objective 2 Evaluate collection when the head is not flat against a target surface. Highresolution images of Itokawa’s Muses-C region show that even in the smooth, boulder-free

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go Sample. . .

Page 39 of 46

107

Fig. 32 The regolith
configuration (in the large
chamber) underneath the
TAGSAM head during a May
2012 reduced-acceleration flight.
There are multiple,
several-cm-diameter rocks in the
TAGSAM contact area.
TAGSAM collected 511 g in this
test

Fig. 33 (a) A simple schematic of the airplane to illustrate the coordinate system of the accelerometer. Most
importantly, +z is down, and −z is up. Thus, a −z acceleration corresponds to pushing regolith in chamber
up towards the top of the sample chamber. (b) The measured vertical acceleration during a sampling run. The
acceleration is in units of Earth g’s. (The lower-density point region centered around 36.5 min is due to a
slower sampling frequency of the accelerometer.) The high-frequency change in the data is real, caused by
aircraft vibrations. The purple curve is the same data after applying a moving average filter (of 20 time steps)
to smooth over the vibrations to better illustrate the “gross” accelerations. Excursions into both positive and
negative acceleration are visible

regions, larger rocks are present. In the event a portion of the head were to contact such a
rock during TAG the head would not be flat against the surface during sampling. To test
collection performance in this case, we fixed the TAGSAM u-joint at its maximum articulation of 15 degrees. This geometry results in a fixed 15 deg tilt between the bottom of
the TAGSAM head and the top plane of the surface regolith. Due to the acceleration environment during these parabolas (see Figs. 33 and 34, and the subsequent discussion), the
regolith bed shifted significantly from its original level state to be biased largely against one
side of the test chamber. Because the regolith material was “unweighted” and mobile due to
small negative accelerations, two factors affected the objective of the test: (1) the head did
not contact the surface with a known tilt relative to the material, and (2) the mobility of the
regolith allowed the head to “carve” through the material prior to firing, potentially compromising the objective of this test. Nevertheless, an unexpected positive byproduct of these
tests is understanding the performance of the head when contacting a low-cohesion surface
in a microgravity environment, which is a possibility at Bennu. In such a case, the regolith
will flow to conform to the head during initial contact, resulting in successful collection. We

107

Page 40 of 46

E.B. Bierhaus et al.

Fig. 34 This sequence of images demonstrates the regolith mobility during the reduced-acceleration phase of
the flight. (Fig. 33 plots the vertical acceleration of this parabola.) During periods of negative acceleration, and
because of airplane vibration and small lateral accelerations, the regolith migrated from its original position.
The black horizontal band through the images is part of the regolith cover retraction and deployment system

conducted a second set of such “tilt” tests in the October 2012 flights (Objective 3 of the 4th
campaign), which are discussed later.
Objective 3 Test the collection performance of a candidate contact pad material. To test
candidate contact material (reticulated aluminum foam), we deposited colored dust on top
of the regolith. Due to the dynamics of the regolith in the small yet consequential accelerations during the reduced-acceleration phase, the regolith and dust became mixed prior to
sample fire, and thus the colored dust was not limited to a surface veneer during the sampling event. The contact pads had some small grains of both the colored dust and ground
basalt (basalt dust generated naturally by grinding of the larger particles), but because of the
particle mixing prior to sampling we could not determine whether the colored grains were
on the surface, or from below the surface. The testing did confirm that contact pads can
collect small particles.
Objective 4 Explore regolith dynamics unique to a low-gravity environment. The acceleration profile of a reduced-acceleration parabola targets a mean value of zero-g, with oscillations into positive and negative g during this time. (The contractual requirements for
each parabola were 0 ± 0.02 g for 10 s and 0 ± 0.05 g for 17 s.) Fig. 33 plots the vertical acceleration profile of one of the May 2012 parabolas. The aircraft vibrations show
up as high-frequency variations in the raw data (left-hand panel); a moving average window
screens out the vibrations to reveal the oscillations around the zero-g mean that occur during
a parabola.

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go Sample. . .

Page 41 of 46

107

Figure 34 is a compilation of single frames at different times from a video acquired
during the reduced-acceleration period, demonstrating the motion of the regolith (during the
same parabola whose accelerations are shown in Fig. 33). At the initiation of the TAGSAM
descent toward the regolith surface, the material is in approximately the same position as it
was when the chamber was prepared for the test. At the time the head contacts the surface,
the material has shifted toward the back and one side of the chamber, following the net lateral
accelerations of the plane over this time. After contact, the u-joint in the head complies with
the orientation of the regolith, and shortly thereafter the arm compression triggers the gas
fire. Comparing the regolith positions to the small but nonzero accelerations shows that the
regolith flowed according to the net accelerations present. As the net acceleration vector
changed, the regolith responded as a viscous fluid, “flowing” as it moved under the new
acceleration. This behavior is not surprising, given that dry material can exhibit fluid-like
behavior as debris flows in a variety of mass-wasting processes (e.g., Collins and Melosh
2003).
Objective 5 Conduct control experiment. We wanted to confirm that the gas dynamics
dominate the sample collection. To do so, we ran one experiment that followed the same
steps as other tests, except that no gas was released at contact. (This also evaluates if
TAGSAM collects any sample in an off-nominal scenario that involves a surface contact
but no gas fire.) Post-test evaluation of the TAGSAM head showed a small number of particles, weighing about 1 g, were collected. When compared with the several-hundred-gram
sample collection for a normal gas-fire collection, the control experiment confirmed sample
collection is dominated by gas fire, although the possibility remains that the simple transfer
of kinetic energy at contact will push some material into the TAGSAM head. Simulations
of contact dynamics in microgravity (Sanchez et al. 2013) demonstrate that simple transfer
of kinetic energy between the head and the surface will push particles off the surface, and
those inside the collection area of the head could be captured and retained. The test and
simulations suggest that TAGSAM may collect a scientifically valuable quantity of material
even in the very unlikely event that the gas system fails. The contact pads also will collect
samples any fine-grained material present at the surface.

4.6.2 October 2012 Flights
The May 2012 flights, and two earlier reduced-acceleration campaigns (Clark et al. 2016)
provided invaluable data that quantified the dynamics and efficiency of a gas-driven collection system in a low-acceleration environment. However, despite the value of these experiments, the oscillation of the net vertical acceleration between positive and negative values
resulted in a regolith bed that was “unloaded,” and in some cases actively mobile, at the time
of sampling (Figs. 33 and 34). Such cases are not representative of the regolith at the time
of collection at Bennu. As a result, we defined a specialized acceleration profile to achieve
test conditions more relevant for the environment during sampling at Bennu. We required
the smallest positive average acceleration that would result in no negative-g excursions. In
consultation with the NASA pilots of the Reduced-Gravity Office (RGO), we defined an
acceleration profile that targeted 0.05 g, the minimum value possible without any excursion
into negative accelerations.
The RGO spent considerable effort supporting our test campaign. In the week prior to the
actual tests, the pilots conducted a practice flight to ensure they met the acceleration profile
requirements. When developing the flight plan for the tests, the team collectively agreed
to include additional practice parabolas prior to each test, i.e., the pilots conducted one (or

107

Page 42 of 46

E.B. Bierhaus et al.

Fig. 35 The vertical acceleration profile for the October 16 test flight. The acceleration is in units of Earth
g’s. Test parabolas are outlined and labeled; the others were practice parabolas. See Fig. 31 for a higher-time
resolution plot of a sampling parabola. Periods of ∼1 g were preparation time for the next chamber; the longer
duration of nonparabolic flight between roughly 31 min and 34 min corresponds to the plane completing a
180° turn to conduct the last two parabolas on a return path that retraced the ground track of the outbound
path

Fig. 36 A plot of the smoothed vertical acceleration profile during the Chamber 100 test of the October
2012 sampling parabolas. The acceleration is in units of Earth g’s. The reduced-acceleration period oscillated
around an approximate mean of 0.05 g, with no negative accelerations. This resulted in a small but consistently “positive-g” acceleration environment that—although larger than the surface accelerations at Bennu—was still a more representative acceleration environment than one that included periods of net-negative
vertical acceleration

two) practice parabolas prior to a sampling parabola. Figure 35 is the summary vertical
acceleration profile for the entire flight that took place on October 16. The parabolas during
which we conducted a test are highlighted and labeled with the chamber tested on that
parabola. Prior to each test, there were one (or two) practice parabolas. Figure 36 plots the

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go Sample. . .

Page 43 of 46

107

Fig. 37 The sampling test from the same parabola whose vertical accelerations are plotted in Fig. 31. The
state of the regolith throughout the parabola is stable, without the mobility seen in earlier flights; compare
with the behavior of the regolith seen in Fig. 28

vertical acceleration profile from one of the flights, demonstrating that the pilots achieved the
target 0.05 g mean acceleration; Fig. 37 is the behavior of the regolith during that parabola.
The NASA pilots performed flawlessly, with no negative g’s in any of the test parabolas
flown during the test week.
Objectives for the October flight campaign were similar to previous campaigns, but to
achieve improved understanding of the collection performance in a more representative acceleration environment—i.e., the primary objective was to conduct collection tests in a carefully controlled acceleration environment defined by our requirement to maintain a ∼0.05 g
acceleration during sampling. Collection-test objectives included: evaluate collection performance of basalt and TLS 7c; evaluate collection results without and with an obstacle;
evaluate collection performance as a function of contact time.
For each flight, we had five test chambers, each with its own regolith and sample head.
Four of the five chambers contained basalt, one of the five chambers contained TLS. We had
less TLS material, and because TLS is friable, the regolith disaggregated more quickly and
required refreshing to maintain the desired particle SFD, hence the single test chamber for
TLS.
Figure 38 plots the collection results for different combinations of test parameters: basalt
and TLS, with and without a 5-cm obstacle (the obstacle introduces a tilt, or gap, between
the head and the regolith surface), and collection time. Several trends emerge. The basalt
collections generally have greater mass, though the difference in collected volume is less.
Increased collection time generally leads to increased collection (also see similar trend in

107

Page 44 of 46

E.B. Bierhaus et al.

Fig. 38 Collection results from the October 2012 reduced-gravity flights. Circles are basalt collections;
squares are TLS collections. Closed symbols are for collections without a gap; open symbols are for collections with a 5-cm gap. The left-hand plot is collected mass; the right-hand plot is collected volume

ground-based collection testing). This is consistent with the behavior of low-density simulants in ground testing (see Sect. 4.5. and Fig. 26).

5 Summary
The OSIRIS-REx flight system is designed around a unique new method of sampling airless bodies in the solar system, and supports all remote-sensing investigations during the
comprehensive asteroid reconnaissance prior to sampling. Measurements by a suite of specially chosen instruments will thoroughly map the surface of Bennu to support sample site
selection, based on the criteria of sampleability, spacecraft safety, and science value. Regolith material will be transported back to Earth inside the sampling head, after it is inserted
and secured in the Sample Return Capsule, which is nearly identical to the Stardust mission’s flight-proven reentry capsule. The implementation of stringent spacecraft contamination control measures preserves the pristine character of the collected sample, and an array
of witness plates document the environment of the sample after collection from the asteroid
surface.
The TAGSAM sampling system uses the technique of fluidization of the regolith by
injecting gas and directing the flow preferentially into a circumferential collection cavity.
There are no moving parts requiring active articulation during the touch-and-go sampling
event. Three independent gas reservoirs can support three separate sampling events. Gas
handling is also passive, operating in the simple blow-down mode. The TAGSAM “touchand-go” collection technique needs less than 5 seconds of contact time to obtain the minimum amount of sample required for study in laboratories on Earth; longer collection times
result in more sample. Extensive tests in the laboratory and onboard a series of reducedgravity aircraft flights, as well as analysis of the gas dynamics, indicate that we can expect
a successful sampling event for a wide particle-size range, including those expected on the
surface of the asteroid Bennu, based on thermal inertia measurements and analysis of other
high-resolution asteroid images.
Acknowledgements We thank the many people whose hard work, dedication, and passion for this mission
transformed an idea into a spacecraft en route to Bennu. This work was supported by National Aeronautics
and Space Administration contract NNG12FD66C. The October 2012 test campaign was an excellent series
of tests, as the pilots enabled our fundamental test objective to perform collection tests in a small but always
positive acceleration environment. We offer thanks to NASA’s RGO and the pilots for meeting our unique
requirements, and for their incredible support during the week. The data collected during those flights are
fundamental contributions to our understanding of TAGSAM performance at Bennu.

The OSIRIS-REx Spacecraft and the Touch-and-Go Sample. . .

Page 45 of 46

107

Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits unrestricted use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source,
provide a link to the Creative Commons license, and indicate if changes were made.

References
K. Berry, B. Sutter, A. May, K. Williams, B.W. Barbee, M. Beckman, B. Williams, OSIRIS-REx touch-andgo (TAG) mission design and analysis. Adv. Astronaut. Sci. 149, 667–678 (2013)
D.T. Blewett, B.W. Denevi, L. Le Corre, V. Reddy, S.E. Schröder, P.M. Pieters, F. Tosi, F. Zambon, M.C.
De Sanctis, E. Ammannito, T. Roatsch, C. Raymond, C.T. Russel, Optical space weathering on Vesta:
radiative-transfer models and Dawn observations. Icarus 265, 161–174 (2016)
B.J. Bos, M.A. Ravine, M. Caplinger, J.A. Schaffner, J.V. Ladewig, R.D. Olds, C.D. Norman, D. Huish, M.
Hughes, S.K. Anderson, D.A. Lorenz, A. May, C.D. Jackman, D. Nelson, M. Moreau, D. Kubitschek, K.
Getzandanner, K.E. Gordon, A. Eberhardt, D.S. Lauretta, Touch and Go Camera System (TAGCAMS)
for the OSIRIS-REx Asteroid Sample Return Mission. Space Sci. Rev. (2017), this issue. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11214-017-0465-2
D. Brownlee, The Stardust Mission: analyzing samples from the edge of the Solar System. Annu. Rev. Earth
Planet. Sci. 42, 179–205 (2014)
P.R. Christensen, V.E. Hamilton, G.L. Mehall, D. Pelham, W. O’Donnell, S. Anwar, H. Bowles, S. Chase,
J. Fahlgren, Z. Farkas, T. Fisher, O. James, I. Kubik, I. Lazbin, M. Miner, M. Rassas, L. Schulze,
K. Shamordola, T. Tourville, G. West, R. Woodward, D. Lauretta, The OSIRIS-REx thermal emission
spectrometer (OTES) instrument. Space Sci. Rev. (2017), this issue. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214018-0513-6
B.E. Clark, R.P. Binzel, E.S. Howell, E.A. Cloutis, M. Ockert-Bell, P. Christensen, M.A. Barucci, F. DeMeo,
D.S. Lauretta, H. Connolly Jr., A. Soderberg, C. Hergenrother, L. Lim, J. Emery, M. Mueller, Asteroid
(101955) 1999 RQ36: spectroscopy from 0.4 to 2.4 µm and meteorite analogues. Icarus 216, 462–475
(2011)
B.C. Clark, E.B. Bierhaus, J.W. Harris, K.S. Payne, D.W. Wurts, R.D. Dubisher, S.L. Deden, TAGSAM: a
gas-driven system for collecting samples from solar system bodies, in IEEE Aerospace Conference, Big
Sky, MT, March 2016. https://doi.org/10.1109/AERO.2016.7500871
G.S. Collins, H.J. Melosh, Acoustic fluidization and the extraordinary mobility of sturzstroms. J. Geophys.
Res. 108 (2003). https://doi.org/10.1029/2003JB002465
M.G. Daly, O.S. Barnouin, C. Dickinson, J. Seabrook, C.L. Johnson, G. Cunningham, T. Haltigin, D. Gaudreau, C. Brunet, I. Aslam, A. Taylor, E.B. Bierhaus, W. Boynton, M. Nolan, D.S. Lauretta, The OSIRISREx Laser Altimeter (OLA) investigation and instrument. Space Sci. Rev. (2017), this issue. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s11214-017-0375-3
J.P. Dworkin et al., OSIRIS-REx contamination control strategy and implementation. Space Sci. Rev. (2017),
this issue. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-017-0439-4
J.P. Emery, Y.R. Fernandez, M.S.P. Kelley, K.T. Warden, C. Hergenrother, D.S. Lauretta, M.J. Drake, H.
Campins, J. Ziffer, Thermal infrared observations and thermophysical characterization of OSIRIS-REx
target asteroid (101955) Bennu. Icarus 234, 17–35 (2014)
R.W. Hamilton, C. Norman, D. Huish, OSIRIS-REx asteroid sample collection—open-loop testing of opticalbased feature tracking at the Space Operations Simulation Center (SOSC). AAS 16-086 (2016)
A.R. Hildebrand, P.J.A. McCausland, P.G. Brown, F.J. Longstaffe, S.D.J. Russell, E. Tagliaferri, J.F. Wacker,
M.J. Mazur, The fall and recovery of the Tagish Lake meteorite. Meteorit. Planet. Sci. 41(3), 407–431
(2006)
D.S. Lauretta, S.S. Balram-Knutson, E. Beshore, W.V. Boynton, C. Drouet d’Aubigny, D.N. DellaGiustina,
H.L. Enos, D.R. Gholish, C.W. Hergenrother, E.S. Howell, C.A. Johnson, E.T. Morton, M.C. Nolan,
B. Rizk, H.L. Roper, A.E. Bartels, B.J. Bos, J.P. Dworkin, D.E. Highsmith, M.C. Moreau, D.A.
Lorenz, L.F. Lim, R. Mink, J.A. Nuth, D.C. Reuter, A.A. Simon, E.B. Bierhaus, B.H. Bryan, R. Ballouz, O.S. Barnouin, R.P. Binzel, W.F. Bottke, V.E. Hamilton, K.J. Walsh, S.R. Chesley, P.R. Christensen, B.E. Clark, H.C. Connolly, M.K. Crombie, M.G. Daly, J.P. Emery, T.J. McCoy, J.W. McMahon, D.J. Scheeres, S. Messenger, K. Nakamura-Messenger, K. Righter, S.A. Sandford, OSIRISREx: sample return from asteroid (101955) Bennu. Space Sci. Rev. (2017), this issue. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11214-017-0405-1
R.A. Masterson, M. Chodas, L. Bayley, B. Allen, J. Hong, P. Biswas, C. McMenamin, K. Stout, E.
Bokhour, H. Bralower, D. Carte, S. Chen, M. Jones, S. Kissel, F. Schmidt, M. Smith, G. Sondecker,
L.F. Lim, D.S. Lauretta, J.E. Grindlay, R.P. Binzel, Regolith X-Ray Imaging Spectrometer (REXIS)

107

Page 46 of 46

E.B. Bierhaus et al.

aboard the OSIRIS-REx asteroid sample return mission. Space Sci. Rev. (2018). https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11214-018-0483-8
A. May, B. Sutter, T. Linn, B. Bierhaus, B. Berry, R. Mink, OSIRIS-REx Touch-and-Go (TAG) mission
design for asteroid sample collection, in 65th International Astronautical Congress, Toronto, CA (2014)
J.W. McMahon, D.J. Scheeres, S.G. Hesar, D. Farnocchia, S. Chesley, D. Lauretta, The OSIRIS-REx radio science experiment at Bennu. Space Sci. Rev. (2017), this issue. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214018-0480-y
H. Miyamoto, H. Yano, D.J. Scheeres, S. Abe, O. Barnouin-Jha, A.F. Cheng, H. Demura, R.W. Gaskell,
N. Hirata, M. Ishiguro, T. Michikami, A.M. Nakamura, R. Nakamura, J. Saito, S. Sasaki, Regolith
migration and sorting on asteroid Itokawa. Science 316, 1011–1014 (2007)
H. Miyamoto, J.S. Kargel, W. Fink, R. Furfaro, Granular processes on Itokawa, a small near-Earth asteroid:
implications for resource utilization, in SPIE, vol. 6960 (2008)
M. Mueller, Surface properties of asteroids from mid-infrared observations and thermophysical modeling.
PhD Dissertation, Freie Universitaet, Berlin (2007)
M.C. Nolan, C. Magri, E.S. Howell, L.A.M. Benner, J.D. Giorgini, C.W. Hergenrother, R.S. Hudson,
D.S. Lauretta, J.-L. Margot, S.J. Ostro, D.J. Scheeres, Shape model and surface properties of the
OSIRIS_REx target asteroid (101955) from radar and lightcurve observations. Icarus 226, 629–640
(2013)
R. Olds, A. May, C. Mario, R. Hamilton, C. Debrunner, K. Anderson, The application of optical based
feature tracking to OSIRIS-REx asteroid sample collection, in American Astronautical Society Meeting,
Contribution 15–114 (2015)
D.C. Reuter, A.A. Simon, The OVIRS visible/IR spectrometer on the OSIRIS-REx mission, in International
Workshop on Instrumentation for Planetary Missions. LPI Contributions, vol. 1683 (2012), p. 1074
D.C. Reuter, A.A. Simon, J. Hair, A. Lunsford, S. Manthripragada, V. Bly, B. Bos, C. Brambora, E. Caldwell,
G. Casto, Z. Dolch, P. Finneran, D. Jennings, M. Jhabvala, E. Matson, M. McLelland, W. Roher, T. Sullivan, E. Weigle, Y. Wen, D. Wilson, D.S. Lauretta, The OSIRIS-REx Visible and InfraRed Spectrometer (OVIRS): spectral maps of the asteroid Bennu. Space Sci. Rev. (2017), this issue. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s11214-018-0482-9
B. Rizk, C. d’Aubigny, D. Golish, C. Fellows, C. Merrill, P. Smith, M.S. Walker, J.W. Hendershot, J. Hancock, D. DellaGiustina, R. Tanner, M. Williams, K. Harshman, M. Fitzgibbon, W. Verts, J. Chen, A.
Dowd, M. Read, D. Hamara, T. Connors, R. Burt, M. Whiteley, M. Watson, B. Crowther, T. McMahon, A. Lowman, L. Harrison, B. Williams, M. Hunten, E. Little, M. Ward, D. Booher, T. Saltzman,
D. Alfred, S. O’Dougherty, M. Walthall, K. Kenagy, S. Peterson, C. See, S. Selznick, C. Suave, M.
Beiser, A. Lancaster, W. Black, D. Lauretta, S. Oliver, C. Morgan, C. Oquest, D. Crowley, C. Castle, R.
Dominguez, M. Sullivan, OCAMS: the OSIRIS-REx camera suite. Space Sci. Rev. (2017), this issue.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-017-0460-7
P. Sanchez, D.J. Scheeres, E.B. Bierhaus, B. Clark, Simulations of regolith interactions in microgravity, in
LPSC, vol. 1719 (2013), p. 2271
D.J. Scheeres, S.G. Hesar, S. Tardivel, M. Hirabayashi, D. Farnocchia, J.W. McMahon, S.R. Chesley, O.
Barnouin, R.P. Binzel, W.F. Bottke, M.G. Daly, J.P. Emery, C.W. Hergenrother, D.S. Lauretta, J.R.
Marshall, P. Michel, M.C. Nolan, K.J. Walsh, The geophysical environment of Bennu. Icarus 276, 116–
140 (2016)

