Climatic Change (2008) 90:299–313
DOI 10.1007/s10584-008-9414-0

“A convenient truth”: air travel passengers’ willingness
to pay to offset their CO2 emissions
R. Brouwer & L. Brander & P. Van Beukering

Received: 7 February 2007 / Accepted: 20 February 2008 / Published online: 22 April 2008
# The Author(s) 2008

Abstract Several economic reviews demonstrate the substantial costs related to climate
change and consequently call for early action. These reviews, however, have been limited
to measuring ‘objective’ risks and expected material damage related to climate change. The
‘subjective’ perceived risk of climate change and society’s willingness to pay (WTP) to
avoid these risks are expected to provide an important additional motivation for direct
action. We investigate whether and why air travel passengers—an increasingly important
source of greenhouse gas emissions—are supportive of measures that increase the cost of
their travel based on the polluter pays principle and compensate the damage caused by their
flight. Compared to the results of the few previous studies that have elicited WTP estimates
for climate policy more generally, our results appear to be at the lower end of the scale,
while a comparison to estimates of the social cost of carbon shows that the average WTP
estimate in this study is close to the estimated marginal damage cost. Although significant
differences are found between travellers from Europe, North America, Asia and the rest of
the world, we show that there exists a substantial demand for climate change mitigation
action. The positive risk premium over and above the expected property damage cost
assessments should be accounted for more explicitly in economic reviews as it will add to
the burden of proof of direct action. Measurements of passenger WTP will help policy
makers to design effective financial instruments aimed at discouraging climate-unfriendly
travel activities as well as to generate funds for the measures directed at climate change
mitigation and adaptation. Based on stated WTP by travellers to offset their greenhouse gas
emissions, funds in the order of magnitude of €23 billion could be generated annually to
finance climate change mitigation activities.

R. Brouwer (*) : L. Brander : P. Van Beukering
Institute for Environmental Studies (IVM), Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, De Boelelaan 1087,
1081 HV Amsterdam, The Netherlands
e-mail: roy.brouwer@ivm.vu.nl

DO9414; No of Pages

300

Climatic Change (2008) 90:299–313

1 Introduction
Climate change has evolved from an “inconvenient hypothesis” to an “inconvenient truth”.
The scientific evidence for anthropogenic global warming is overwhelming (Gore 2006).
Also further down the cause–effect chain, on the impact-side of climate change, evidence is
accumulating rapidly. Although estimates of the social costs of greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions are highly sensitive to the assumptions made (e.g. the choice of discount rate,
equity weighting, corrections for risk aversion and adaptive behaviour), various reviews
demonstrate the substantial expected economic costs related to climate change (e.g. Tol
1999; Pearce 2003; Stern 2006). All reviews point in the same direction: ‘the benefits of
strong and early action far outweigh the economic cost of not acting’ (Stern 2006)1.
These reviews raise two important issues. First, there is the question as to whether the
estimated costs of climate change are accurate. It can be argued that the estimates are in fact
incomplete in that they are based on expected property damage costs determined through
‘objective’ measurements of the risks involved, not the theoretically correct ‘subjective’
expected utility values. The benefit-cost ratios based on property damage costs alone may
substantially underestimate the total benefits since it does not account for public risk
aversion. Tol (1999) presents estimates of marginal damage costs that are adjusted to reflect
risk aversion, which are around three times higher than the unadjusted costs. These latter
well-being effects, measured in economics through the concept of society’s willingness to
pay (WTP) to avoid a specific risk when people are not entitled to risk protection, should be
added to the expected damage costs (e.g. Jones-Lee 1989; Pearce and Smale 2005). Since
the 1970s it has become generally accepted that effective risk and natural hazard
management should not be informed by objective measures only, but should also include
subjective risk assessments that reflect people’s social cognition of risk (Slovic 1987;
Cvetkovich and Earle 1992; Beck 1992).
Second, despite consensus within the academic community on the need to act now, it
remains to be seen whether policy makers and polluters are truly willing to take the
necessary steps to avoid further climate change and related economic costs. There is
currently very limited evidence whether or not people perceive climate change as a threat
worth avoiding (e.g. Cameron 2001, 2005; Layton and Brown 2000; Layton and Levine
2002).
The main objective of this study is to investigate whether there is a demand for climate
change mitigation action and examine what motivations underlie this demand. More
specifically, we aim to reveal whether air travel passengers as polluters are supportive of
measures that increase the cost of their travel and compensate the damage caused by their
flights, and to quantify the benefits they obtain from mitigating their emissions. This
provides an indication of the before mentioned economic welfare measure currently missing
in economic reviews in support of direct action to avoid the future risks of climate change.
We compare this with the existing cost and benefit estimates. Moreover, such measurements
of passenger WTP helps policy makers to design effective financial instruments aimed at
discouraging climate-unfriendly travel activities as well as to generate funds for the
measures directed at climate change mitigation and adaptation.
To meet these objectives, we conducted a survey of air travel passengers at Amsterdam
Schiphol airport, one of the largest airports in Europe. By focusing specifically on air travel
1

The Stern Review has been criticised for its choice of assumptions and the resulting high estimate of
damage costs. Adjusting these assumptions towards more generally acceptable values, however, still results
in estimates of damage costs that warrant extensive greenhouse gas mitigation (Arrow 2007).

Climatic Change (2008) 90:299–313

301

passengers we also aim to contribute to current policy developments regarding the control
of GHG emissions from aviation. Driven by the polluter-pays-principle, governments are
currently considering the implementation of various policy instruments to extract funds for
climate change mitigation from the aviation industry and its passengers. For example, in
early December 2006 UK chancellor Gordon Brown announced a doubling of air passenger
duty on flights. Two weeks later, the European Commission announced that internal EU
flights would be included within the EU emissions trading scheme from 2011.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the relationship
between aviation and climate change, and touches upon the issue of carbon offsetting
initiatives. Section 3 presents the research methodology, including the introduction of a
carbon travel tax for air travellers to offset their contribution to climate change. The main
results are presented in Section 4 and Section 5 concludes.

2 Aviation growth and greenhouse gas emissions
Aviation traffic has increased dramatically over the past 40 years, with passenger traffic
growing at approximately 9% per year since the 1960s (IPCC 1999). Although this level of
growth is anticipated to slow down to some extent as markets in North America and Europe
mature, the number of passenger kilometres flown is projected to continue to grow at 5%
per year globally. In 2002, global civil aviation clocked up roughly 33 billion kilometres,
and this is set to double over the next 20 years (Eyers et al. 2004). This level of aviation
activity and the associated increase in emissions of GHG has raised concerns over the
impact of aviation on the global climate, and the compatibility of aviation expansion with
policies to address climate change.
Aviation uses fossil fuels and consequentially emits carbon dioxide (CO2) and other
GHG including methane and nitrous oxide. Fuel use in aviation is projected to increase at
3% per year—this is lower than the projected growth in passenger kilometres due to
continuing improvements in aircraft efficiency. In comparison to terrestrial sources of
emissions, however, aviation is recognized as having an enhanced global warming effect
due to the altitude at which aircraft fly (IPCC 1999). This enhanced effect is estimated to be
between two and four times the global warming potential of the CO2 emissions from
aviation. The best estimate of the contribution of aircraft emissions to human induced
global warming is that aviation accounted for 3.5% of the total radiative forcing by all
anthropogenic activities in 1992. This is not a high figure, but due to the projected growth
in aviation, this could rise to 15% by 2050 (IPCC 1999).
Given the anticipated rise in GHG emissions from aviation there is a recognized need to
control and compensate for these emissions. An international agreement on the control of
emissions from aviation has, however, been impeded by the international nature of the
industry and the lack of agreement on how emissions should be allocated (Oberthur 2003).
GHG from aviation are currently only included in national emissions inventories under the
UN Framework Convention on Climate Change for informational purposes and are not
restricted by the emissions targets agreed under the Kyoto Protocol. Article 2.2 of the
Kyoto Protocol merely asks industrialized countries to pursue the reduction of GHG from
aviation through the International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO), which is still
considering a range of technical, air traffic management, and market based instruments. The
European Commission has recommended that intra-EU and international aviation should be
included within the EU emissions trading scheme (ETS), but this proposal faces difficulties
in terms of international legality and compatibility with the Kyoto Protocol (Cairns and

302

Climatic Change (2008) 90:299–313

Newson 2006). It should be noted that the U.S. Government does levy a tax on aviation fuel
used for domestic flights by U.S. commercial aircraft. This tax is not applied to fuel
purchased by non-U.S. airlines or to fuel used for international flights (Cairns and Newson
2006). There is some doubt, however, over whether policy instruments such as tax and
emissions trading that simply raise the cost of aviation would result in any significant
decrease in fuel use and GHG emissions. Boon et al. (2007) find that around 100% of the
costs of the EU ETS would be passed directly on to customers. Olsthoorn (2001) finds
evidence that the price elasticity of demand for fuel is low, which suggests that a tax set at
around the level of marginal external costs of CO2 emissions would only result in
negligible reductions in emissions.
An alternative policy option for controlling the climate change impact of aviation, which
conforms to the polluter pays principle, is a hypothecated tax on aviation, with the revenue
being spent on carbon offsets. Carbon or GHG offsets are certified emissions reductions or
sequestration that can be purchased by an individual, business or government to offset the
emissions resulting from their activities. Offsetting essentially involves balancing GHG
emissions from one activity with purposeful GHG reductions or sequestration from another
activity in order to maintain “carbon neutrality”. For example, as hosts of the 31st G8
summit in July 2005 in Scotland, the UK government purchased offsets for the GHG
emitted from air travel to the summit.
Carbon offsetting activities may include reforestation, renewable energy, and energy
efficiency projects. Uncertainties regarding the measurement and permanence of GHG
emission reductions, particularly with respect to carbon sequestration, have resulted in concerns
over the credibility of offsets. There are now many commercial and non-profit providers of
carbon offsets. A survey of 16 offset providers, covering the gamut of project types, locations,
and commercial status, indicates a range of offset prices from €3.30 to €23 per ton (t) CO2equivalent (eq), with an average of €11.80 tCO2-eq (prices are for December 2nd 2006—
www.ecobusinesslinks.com 04/12/2006). Given the fact that most of these schemes depend
on voluntary compliance, the main question is whether, in the current situation of high airport
taxes and fuel surcharges, airline passengers are willing to pay for their CO2 emissions.

3 Valuation methodology
The economic valuation method applied in this study is called contingent valuation (CV). CV
is a social survey method where individuals are presented with information about specific
environmental changes, the values of which are not accounted for in economic markets or
fully captured through market-based instruments. In the survey, individual perception,
attitudes and preferences regarding these changes and their non-market values are elicited. In
order to measure the effect of the suggested changes on people's welfare, respondents are
typically asked for either their willingness to pay (WTP) or their willingness to accept (WTA)
compensation for the gains or losses involved (Mitchell and Carson 1989; Bateman et al.
2002). Of these options the WTP approach has become the most frequently applied and has
been given peer review endorsement through a variety of studies (e.g. Arrow et al. 1993).
Aggregated across those who benefit from the services provided by ecosystems and
natural resources, the aggregated WTP or WTA amount provides an indicator of the total
economic value (TEV) of any change in their provision, including their quality level.
Environmental economists have introduced a taxonomy of this TEV, distinguishing
between use and non-use values, in order to account for the various reasons and motives
people may have to value environmental change. Stated preference methods like CV are the

Climatic Change (2008) 90:299–313

303

only economic methods that are able to account for possible non-use motivations underlying people's value statements. Whereas use values refer to the values associated with the
actual use of the various goods and services provided by ecosystems and natural resources,
non-use values are unrelated to any actual or potential use, and may refer for example to the
value people attach to preserving ecosystems or species (existence values) or the value they
attach to leaving a healthy environment behind for future generations (bequest value).
In a two-day CV survey, carried out in the beginning of November 2006 at Amsterdam
Schiphol airport, the fourth largest airport in Europe after London Heathrow, Paris Charles
de Gaulle and Frankfurt with over 44 million passengers and more than 420 thousand
flights in 2005 (Schiphol Group 2006), more than 400 air travel passengers from around the
world were interviewed face-to-face about their travel behaviour, awareness of the
environmental impacts of their travel behaviour and their WTP for a carbon travel tax to
offset their contribution to the emission of GHG. Together these passengers travelled 1.6
million kilometres, emitting 375 tCO2-eq (one-way). Passengers either arriving or departing
on 8 or 9 November from Schiphol airport were interviewed for about 10 to 15 min using a
thoroughly pre-tested questionnaire consisting of 35 questions. Passengers were selected
randomly at a next-to-pass basis2. Three quarters of the questions are closed-ended in order
to minimize the necessary interview time. The WTP questions are reproduced in the
Appendix to this paper.

4 Results
4.1 Passenger characteristics and awareness of the impacts of flying
Most interviewed passengers are male (60%), ranging in age between 18 and 83 years, with an
average age of 38 years. Forty percent of the passengers interviewed travel by plane for business,
the rest for pleasure or a combination of business and pleasure. Almost 80% flies alone, 20% with
one or more family members. The variety of passenger nationalities is presented in Fig. 1. The
sample population is close to the inter-regional passenger movements from Schiphol airport. A
high share of the interviewed passengers has the Dutch nationality (27%), followed by the
United Kingdom (18%) and other Europeans (20%) (including Belgium, France, Germany,
Norway, Sweden, Finland, Spain, Italy, Greece, Hungary, Romania, Slovenia). Almost 20% of
the interviewed passengers come from Asia (China, Japan, India, Philippines, Thailand,
Malaysia, Indonesia), and 12% from the United States and Canada. A small number of
passengers (<5%) come from Australia, Africa (Tanzania, Mozambique, South-Africa) or
South-America (Ecuador, Colombia, Uruguay, Brazil).
Besides income, significant differences are found between these nationalities in terms of
(continental and intercontinental) travel frequency and the price paid for airplane tickets.
Europeans and North Americans travel most frequently: about ten times per year.
Passengers from the rest of the world travel half as much. North Americans paid most
for their plane ticket (€950 including taxes and other services), followed by the rest of the
world (€780) and Asians (€735).
2

An important selection criterion was that travellers speak and understand English. Three questionnaire
versions were used: a Dutch version for Dutch passengers (WTP questions in euros), an English version for
other European passengers (WTP questions in euros), and an English version for the rest of the world with
WTP questions in both euros and US dollars. Where necessary interviewers were instructed to help
respondents to convert the money amounts in the questionnaire into their own currency.

Share of population/sample (in %)

304

Climatic Change (2008) 90:299–313

80

60

40

20

0
Europe

NorthAmerica

Latin
America

Interregional passenger movements Schiphol

Africa

Asia

Passengers in sample

Fig. 1 Share of interregional passenger movements at Schiphol airport compared with the nationalities
included in the sample

Interesting differences are found when investigating passenger knowledge and
awareness of the impacts of flying on the environment and the link with climate change.
UK and Dutch travellers are significantly more aware of the relationship between flying and
climate change than other nationalities. The awareness level is lowest for passengers living
in Asia. Significant differences are also found when investigating the level of concern
regarding climate change, with UK passengers again being significantly more concerned
than other passengers. No significant differences can be detected between North Americans
and other (non-UK) Europeans, but concern is significantly lower in Asia, Latin America
and Africa. UK residents also attach significantly more importance to the environment
compared to other important public issues like employment, health and safety or economic
growth. On the same scale, US citizens value the environment significantly less than any
other group of passengers. Europeans and Asians also feel more responsible for climate
change than North-Americans.
When asked how much passengers know about the Kyoto protocol, we find that
Europeans are more knowledgeable than other nationalities. Half of all European
passengers know the protocol’s objectives. This is the case for 44% of the North-American
passengers and 35% of the Asian travellers. Forty-one percent of the latter never heard of
the Kyoto protocol. These percentages are lower for European (24%) and North-American
(30%) passengers. About a quarter of all passengers has heard of the protocol, but has no
idea what it aims to achieve. North-Americans and Europeans are more convinced than
Asians that the introduction of a carbon travel tax will be effective in tackling climate
change.
4.2 Testing the passenger pays principle
After introducing the idea of a carbon travel tax to passengers, they are asked if they would
be willing to pay in principle for such a tax over and above the plane ticket for their current
flight (see the Appendix to this paper). Three quarters of all travellers are willing to pay a

Climatic Change (2008) 90:299–313

305

carbon travel tax in addition to the price of their current airplane ticket3. Differences are
found between continents, however, with slightly more Europeans (80%) than NorthAmericans (75%) willing to pay in principle, and Asian travellers (59%) being least willing
to pay for a carbon travel tax. Protest against the imposition of a new carbon travel tax is
limited to 14%, which is considered acceptable in this study. The most important reason for
travellers to protest against paying is passenger disbelief that the carbon travel tax and the
proposed (trees for travel) program will have any real impact.
Passengers who are willing to pay are primarily motivated by a sense of moral obligation
and responsibility to pay for their contribution to climate change, concern about the
environment in general and future generations (Fig. 2). Hence, ‘existence values’ and
‘bequest values’ seem to dominate the stated WTP responses. We find little to no evidence
of what has been labelled ‘warm glow’ in the valuation literature (e.g. Nunes and
Schokkaert 2003), meaning that travellers agree to pay because they like to give to good
causes or charity. A considerable share of travellers wants to avoid future natural and
economic disasters, which is interpreted as evidence of a positive risk premium. As said,
these types of values are usually not included in any of the existing economic reviews
related to global warming.
Respondents who are willing to pay in principle are subsequently asked whether they are
willing to pay a specific amount of money. A start bid is varied across respondents, ranging
between 5 and 100 euros per flight, and depending on their reply (yes or no), they are asked
for their WTP for a second follow-up bid to which they can again answer either yes or no.
If respondents answer ‘no’ (‘yes’) to the start bid, the follow-up bid is a lower (higher)
amount. This is referred to as a double bounded (DB) dichotomous choice CV question
(Hanemann and Kanninen 1999). This procedure yields an interval WTP value for each
individual respondent in which respondents’ maximum WTP value lies. The DB CV results
are analyzed using the Turnbull estimation method (Haab and McConnell 1997), and
presented in Table 1. The Turnbull estimator is based on a grouping of binary responses in
bid intervals. To guarantee non-negative outcomes for WTP, the probability of WTP
responses is constrained to be positive and sum to unity across bid intervals. The Turnbull
estimator provides a lower bound for average WTP. Standard errors of the Turnbull WTP
values are calculated based on bootstrap procedures (Efron and Tibshirani 1993).
Based on the t-test, no significant differences can be found between Europeans and
North-Americans or North Americans and Asians. Europeans are, however, willing to pay
significantly more than air travellers from Asia (t-value=2.059; p<0.040). Given the
relatively low number of observations for North-Americans and Asians, these results have
to be interpreted with the necessary care. The estimated average WTP results per flight
presented in Table 1 are also related to the calculated average one-way travel distance and
the emission of GHG per flight expressed in CO2-eq. Travel distance and corresponding
emission of CO2 and total GHG are computed based on travellers’ travel itinerary with the
help of the calculator at www.greenseat.nl. Relating the estimated mean WTP values to the
mean values found for travel distance and corresponding GHG emissions, average WTP
ranges between 20 eurocents per 100 km for air travellers from Asia and 1 euro per 100 km

3

This finding is supported by the results of a recent survey of 22,182 individuals in 20 countries conducted
for the BBC on attitudes to climate change policies and taxes (BBC 2007). This survey found that 77% of the
respondents were supportive of raising taxes on energy sources that contribute to climate change if the tax
revenues were devoted only to increasing energy efficiency and developing energy sources that do not
contribute to climate change.

306

Climatic Change (2008) 90:299–313
Traveller responsibility
4%
Environmental concern

3%

2%

24%

6%

Avoid disasters
Reduce damage costs
Future generations

22%
Protect wildlife
Warm glow
24%

3%
12%

Protect environment
irrespective of cost
Other reason

Fig. 2 Motivations for air traveller WTP for a carbon travel tax

for air travellers from Europe. In the whole sample, passengers are willing to pay on
average 60 eurocents per 100 km they fly. This corresponds with an average WTP of about
25 euros per tonne tCO2-eq.
Compared to the results of other studies that have elicited WTP estimates for climate
policy based on stated preference methods (converted into 2006 prices), our results appear
to be at the lower end of the scale, although it is noted that the literature in this field is still
very limited. Li et al. (2004) analyze the WTP of American citizens for climate policy and
find that half of the sample are willing to pay about 3 euros per tCO2-eq. Hersch and
Viscusi (2006) report that Europeans are willing to pay up to 3.7% more for petrol to
combat climate change, which translates to around 156 euros per tCO2-eq. Viscusi and
Zeckhauser (2006) find that Harvard students are willing to pay an extra $0.50 per gallon of
petrol (a 25% increase) for GHG emission reduction (263 euros per tCO2-eq). In
comparison to estimates of the social cost of carbon as reviewed by Tol (1999), which
vary between 8 and 35 euros per tCO2-eq at 2006 prices, we find that our WTP estimate
is close to the estimated marginal damage cost, if somewhat at the higher end of the
scale.
Following the DB WTP question, respondents are asked in an open-ended (OE) followup question what the maximum amount of money is they are willing to pay over and above
their current airplane ticket to compensate for their contribution to the emission of CO2 of
their specific travel distance that day. Although the OE WTP values are significantly higher
than the DB WTP values, again no significant differences can be found between Europeans
and North-Americans and North-Americans and Asians. A significant difference exists
between Europeans and Asians4. In order to avoid overestimation, we only present the
lower bound Turnbull results in Table 1.
When linking these individual OE WTP values to individual travel distances and GHG
emissions, significant differences are found between all groups. Europeans are in this case

4

Test results are available from the authors on request.

Climatic Change (2008) 90:299–313

307

Table 1 Average WTP results
Europe

Mean WTP (€) per flight
26.6
95% conf. interval
21.7–31.5
0.010
Mean WTP (€) per km travelledb
41.0
Mean WTP (€) per emitted ton GHG in CO2-equivalents
Maximum WTP per ton GHG expressed as income share (%)c 6.5 (0.7)
N
233

NorthAsia
America
20.2
9.1–31.2
0.004
17.1
2.9 (0.6)
42

All
passengersa

16.1
23.1
10.4–21.7 19.4–26.9
0.002
0.006
10.0
25.0
2.3 (0.7) 5.5 (0.5)
59
349

Explanatory notes:
a

Including respondents from other regions in the world.

b

One-way travel distance.

c

Based on significantly higher OE WTP values. Standard errors between brackets.

willing to pay significantly more per travel distance and GHG emission than NorthAmericans and North-Americans are willing to pay significantly more than Asians.
Interestingly, when relating the stated OE WTP values to respondent household income,
the average share of WTP in household income is statistically the same across all air
traveller groups (2.4% for the sample as a whole) even though Europeans and NorthAmericans earn significantly more than travellers from Asia (no significant difference
exists in disposable household income between European and North-American travellers).
Correcting for travel distance and GHG emissions, the relative results change however.
Europeans are now relatively willing to pay significantly more than North-American and
Asian travellers, while no significant difference can be detected between the latter two
groups. Mean WTP per ton GHG equals 6.5% of disposable household income for
European travellers compared to 2.9% and 2.3% for North-American and Asian air
travellers respectively.
Finally, when asked how likely it is that air travellers will actually pay the stated
maximum WTP if the carbon travel tax is voluntary, the results are not very convincing.
Forty percent of the North-Americans consider it unlikely that they would pay in that case
against 35% of the Europeans and 14% of the Asians. Fifty percent of the Asian travellers,
47% of the European and 37% of the North-American air travellers believe it is likely that
they would pay.
4.3 Factors determining air travel passenger WTP for a carbon travel tax
Factors that have a significant impact on the WTP results per flight presented in Table 1 are
analyzed through interval regression techniques using the statistical software Stata. The
determinants of stated WTP can be derived from the conventional WTP function:
0

WTPi ¼ xi b þ "i
where WTP* is the unobserved variable of willingness to pay and xi is a vector of
individual respondent characteristics, β the corresponding vector of coefficients and ɛi is a
normally distributed error term with zero mean and variance σ2.
Having used a DB dichotomous choice CV approach, we have information on WTP
intervals. Respondents are asked two questions: do you accept the start bid and do you

308

Climatic Change (2008) 90:299–313

accept the follow-up bid. Based on these two questions, four possible intervals can be
constructed for WTP (e.g. Hanemann et al. 1991; Alberini 1995):
WTP*>bi
ai <WTP*<bi
ci <WTP*<ai
WTP*<ci

accept both start bid (ai) and follow-up bid (bi)
accept the start bid (ai) and reject the follow-up bid (bi)
reject the start bid (ai) and accept the follow-up bid (ci)
reject both start bid (ai) and follow-up bid (ci)

The interval regression model is estimated using maximum likelihood regression
techniques (e.g. Maddala 1983). In view of the fact that the interval categories are ordered,
the response variable represents the probability of selecting each response category. The
multivariate regression results are presented in Table 2. All effects presented in Table 2,
except for two of the three dummies representing air travellers’ place of residence, are
statistically significant at the 10% level. The significance of the overall model fit is
confirmed by the outcome of the Wald test. The total number of observations is lower than
the original number of interviews because of the exclusion of missing values. The
calculated pseudo R-squared is used here as a rough indicator of overall model fit. The
statistic is not very high (almost 25%), but lacks the straightforward interpretation of
explanatory power (McFadden 1994). Standard errors are corrected for possible heteroscedasticity using the Huber–White estimator of variance.

Table 2 Interval regression results for WTP per flight
Explanatory factor

Values

Constant
North-American air travellers
Asian air travellers
Rest of the world air
travellers
Start bid
Flying frequency continental
Current price ticket
Household disposable income
Air traveller awareness
impact flying
on environment
Air traveller perceived
responsibility for Climate
Change
Air traveller perceived
effectiveness carbon travel
tax
Log-likelihood
Wald χ2
Pseudo R-squared
N

–
Dummy (1=respondent is North-American)
Dummy (1=respondent is Asian)
Dummy (1=respondent is from the rest of the world)

−66.233*** (25.314)
3.593 (7.998)
−10.005* (5.799)
−12.000 (10.400)

Linear (€5–100)
Linear (1–60 times/year)
Linear (natural logarithm €10–3915/ticket)
Linear (natural logarithm €450–5000/month)
Dummy (1=respondent is aware and is able to list
the impact of flying on the environment)

0.455*** (0.072)
0.584*** 0.228
3.887* (2.154)
6.164** (3.092)
7.996* (4.531)

Linear (0—not responsible at all–4—very
responsible)

4.818** (2.280)

Linear (0—not effective at all–4—very effective)

4.120** (2.063)

Explanatory notes:
Standard errors of the parameter estimates between brackets.
*** p<0.01; ** p<0.05; * p<0.10.

Parameter
estimate

−407.329
97.77 (p<0.001)
24.0
292

Climatic Change (2008) 90:299–313

309

Whilst accounting for a variety of influencing factors, including disposable
household income, no significant differences can be detected between air travellers
except for Asian travellers when European travellers are used as the baseline category
in the regression model5. As before in Table 1—but this time accounting for income
differences and other influencing factors—the probability that Asian air travellers end up
in a higher ordered WTP interval is significantly lower than for European air travellers,
whereas no significant differences can be found between European and North American
passengers or the rest of the world.
As expected based on economic theory, WTP is significantly influenced by disposable
household income and the intensity of use of the good for which travellers are asked to
pay. The more someone is able to pay, the higher the probability that someone replies
positively to the presented bid amounts, all other things being equal. The same positive
relationship is found between stated WTP for the carbon travel tax and the number of
times respondents fly. We find a significant relationship for continental flights, but not for
intercontinental flights (or the aggregate of both). A possible explanation for this finding
may be that a number of respondents commented that they believe that a carbon travel
tax is justified for continental flights in view of the fact that travellers can choose
alternative modes of transportation for continental travel, but not for intercontinental
travel.
Travellers’ perception of their own responsibility for climate change and the
effectiveness of the proposed carbon travel tax also have a significant positive impact on
stated WTP. The more someone feels personally responsible for climate change or the
higher the perceived effectiveness of taxing people for their contribution to climate change
when flying, the higher the probability that someone says ‘yes’ to the presented bids.
The finding that passenger awareness of the impact of flying on climate change has a
significant positive impact on stated WTP supports our confidence in the WTP results. The
more informed the respondent, the higher our confidence in general in the stated WTP
responses. Overall confidence in the survey findings is furthermore founded on the fact that
the survey meets important application recommendations that respondents should
understand and be familiar with the good valued and have had or be allowed to obtain
prior valuation and choice experience with respect to consumption levels of that good (e.g.
Cummings et al. 1986; Mitchell and Carson 1989). All respondents in the sample had flown
before, only 1% flew for the first time.
As expected based on previous CV research (e.g. Mitchell and Carson 1989; Bateman et
al. 2005), significant positive anchoring is found of stated WTP on the start bid and the
current price travellers pay for their airplane ticket. The higher the start bid or the airfare,
the higher the likelihood of falling in a higher ordered bid interval. Given the probabilistic
nature of the estimated model, it is difficult to say how much the starting bid influences
average WTP in absolute terms6. Both the start bid and the current price paid for the good
in question provide an important psychological value cue to the respondent.

5

The correlation between the explanatory factors does not exceed 30 percent. The highest correlation
between the place of residence and disposable household income is found for Asian travellers (r=-0.253; p<
0.001).
6
Regressing the OE WTP values against disposable household income and start bid using OLS and a double
log functional form results in a marginal effect of start bid on stated maximum WTP of 0.326 (p<0.001).
This suggests that—all other things being equal—a one percent increase in the start bid results in a 0.3
percent increase in stated maximum WTP.

310

Climatic Change (2008) 90:299–313

The price paid for the airplane ticket is highly correlated with the distance flown (r=
0.610; p<0.001). Including both is therefore not possible as this would result in
multicolinearity. Travel distance has a significant positive impact on the response variable,
but including this variable instead of the price variable makes the awareness factor become
statistically insignificant, and this model is therefore not presented here.
Finally, no significant impact can be detected of any of the other standard demographic
and socio-economic respondent characteristic variables included in CV research. Whether
the flight was for business or pleasure and the respondent flew business or economy class
with or without family members did not have any influence on stated WTP either.

5 Conclusions
The willingness of the general public to invest in climate change mitigation may be much higher
than is generally assumed. The main motivation for this positive WTP is not so much the
general desire of people to give to charities and good causes, but rather stems from the
recognition of responsibility and accountability for climate change as well as the genuine belief
in the detrimental effects of climate change on future generations. We find that awareness and
demand for climate change mitigation vary across aviation passengers depending on their place
of origin. Europeans are most aware and willing to pay for carbon offsets when controlling for
the distances flown and associated GHG emission using the higher OE WTP results, whereas
North Americans and Asians are less informed and less willing to act, also not when accounting
for income differences (i.e. ability to pay). The lack of awareness in Asian travellers is a concern
given the projected growth in the aviation industry in Asia.
The findings of this study supplement the existing economic literature on the costs of
future climate change. Reviews of the costs of climate change such as those produced by
Tol (1999), Pearce (2003), and the recent review by Stern (2006) have been limited to
measuring ‘objective’ risks of expected material damage related to the impact of climate
change on the economy and the environment. This study shows how the ‘subjective’ or
perceived risk of climate change is an important additional motivation for tackling climate
change. In our survey, people generally dislike being at risk and are willing to pay to reduce
their exposure to risks associated with climate change. This reduced disamenity through
mitigating climate change is an important economic benefit of action. Existence and
bequest values and positive risk premiums over and above the ‘objective’ damage cost
assessments should be accounted for more explicitly in existing economic reviews as it will
add substantially to the burden of proof of direct action.
Regarding the demand and supply of carbon offsets for GHG emissions from aviation,
the results of our survey suggest that airline passengers’ demand for offsets may easily
exceed the supply price of offsets. The survey results show that 75% of the passengers are
willing to pay on average €25 per tCO2-eq emitted using the conservative lower bound
WTP estimate. On the supply side, the average price per tCO2-eq is currently around €12.
We therefore conclude that the market potential for carbon offsets is substantial. Given that
the civil aviation industry currently emits approximately 1.3 billion tCO2-eq per year (Eyers
et al. 2004), the market for carbon offsets alone could account for more than €23 billion in
climate change mitigation activities annually when simply aggregating the results found
here at one of the largest European airports across the whole aviation industry under the
rough assumption that the survey results are representative for airports worldwide. This
leads us to conclude the ‘convenient truth’ that air travel passengers are willing to pay to
offset their GHG emissions.

Climatic Change (2008) 90:299–313

311

6 Epilogue
It has been exactly one year since the implementation of the survey and the revision of this
paper. Several interesting developments took place in the context of passengers’ WTP to
offset their CO2 emissions from which we can draw valuable lessons. First, numerous
voluntary offset schemes were introduced by airlines and airports, which performed worse
than expected by their initiators. An important reason seems to be that passengers appear to
be willing to participate if and only if other passengers do so too. Free riders or better ‘free
flyers’ in this case appear to have a negative influence on passengers’ willingness to
participate in offset schemes. Second, several governments in Europe are proposing and
seem determined to push through a compulsory climate change tax for air travellers
although there is strong resistance and opposition from airline companies and airports.
Opponents of such a tax claim that such unilateral national schemes will only reduce the
competitive position of the aviation industry and the airports in the countries where such a
tax is to be introduced. Equally important is the counterargument that the tax revenues are
not earmarked for climate change policies. Our study confirms that passenger belief in the
effectiveness of the tax significantly influences WTP and that introducing a voluntary tax is
expected to result in a high degree of non-participation.
Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.

Appendix
Suppose that depending on your travel distance an extra carbon travel tax would be
introduced on your plane ticket to reduce and avoid further climate change by investing this
carbon travel tax in a ‘Trees for Travel’ program managed and controlled by an independent
international organization, who invests this money in trees to compensate for your
contribution to climate change.
NOTE: if respondent is a business traveller whose ticket is paid for by the employer, ask
him/her to answer the next questions as if he/she would have to pay the ticket him/herself
1 Would you be willing to pay such a carbon travel tax in principle, the height of which
depends on travel distance, to compensate for your contribution to the emission of CO2
and hence climate change?
Note: This money will be used exclusively for the funding of planting trees!
1 No → GO TO QUESTION 2
2 yes → GO TO QUESTION 3
2 If you are not willing to pay for this in principle, can you indicate why not?
[Try to circle only one answer if possible, namely the most important reason]
0 I don’t believe in climate change
1 My income is too low
2 Climate change does not affect me or my family
3 I prefer to spend my money on other things
4 I don’t believe that such a program would have any real impact
5 Other reason, namely. .........................................................................
SKIP THE NEXT QUESTIONS 3 TO 7

312

Climatic Change (2008) 90:299–313

3 Suppose the extra carbon travel tax to offset your contribution to the emission of CO2 of
your specific travel distance today would be € X extra on top of your current airplane
ticket. Would you be willing to pay this extra carbon travel tax?
0 No → GO TO QUESTION 4
1 yes → GO TO QUESTION 5
4 If not this amount, are you willing to pay € Y extra on top of your current airplane ticket
to compensate for your contribution to the emission of CO2 of your specific travel
distance today?
0 No → GO TO QUESTION 6
1 yes → GO TO QUESTION 6
5 Are you in that case also willing to pay € Z extra on top of your current airplane ticket
to compensate for your contribution to the emission of CO2 of your specific travel
distance today?
0 No → GO TO QUESTION 6
1 yes → GO TO QUESTION 6
6 What is the MAXIMUM amount of money are you willing to pay over and above your
current airplane ticket to compensate for your contribution to the emission of CO2 of
your specific travel distance today?
€ ..................
7 What is the most important reason why you are willing to pay this specific maximum
amount of money?
[Try to circle only one answer if possible, namely the most important reason]
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8

I feel responsible for my contribution to climate change
I care about the environment in general
To avoid future natural disasters
To reduce future economic damage costs
To protect future generations
To protect flora and fauna on this earth
I like to give to good causes
The environment has the right to be protected irrespective of the costs
Other reason, namely. ......................................................................

References
Alberini A (1995) Efficiency vs bias of willingness-to-pay estimates: bivariate and interval-data models. J
Environ Econ Manage 29:169–180
Arrow KJ (2007) Global climate change: a challenge to policy. The Economists’ Voice 4(3):2
Arrow KJ, Solow R, Portney PR, Leamer EE, Radner R, Schuman H (1993) Report of the NOAA panel on
contingent valuation. Fed Regist 58(10):4601–4614 January 15
Bateman IJ, Carson RT, Day B, Hanemann M, Hanley N, Hett T, Jones-Lee M, Loomes G, Mourato S,
Ozdemiroglu E, Pearce DW, Sugden R, Swanson J (2002) Economic valuation with stated preference
techniques: a manual. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK
Bateman IJ, Brouwer R, Hanley N, Georgiou S, Machado M, Mourato S, Saunders C (2005) A ‘natural
experiment’ approach to contingent valuation of private and public UV health risk reduction strategies in
low and high risk Countries. Environ Resour Econ 31:47–72
BBC (2007) Global public opinion survey on climate change. Web reference (10/12/2007): http://news.bbc.
co.uk/2/shared/bsp/hi/pdfs/02_11_07bbcclimatesurvey.pdf

Climatic Change (2008) 90:299–313

313

Beck U (1992) Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity. Sage London
Boon B, Davidson M, Faber J, van Velzen A (2007) Allocation of allowances for aviation in the EU ETS. CE
Delft, Delft, The Netherlands
Cairns S, Newson C (2006) Predict and decide: aviation, climate change and UK policy. Environmental
Change Institute, University of Oxford, UK
Cameron TA (2001) Updating subjective risks in the presence of conflicting information: an application to
climate change. J Risk Uncertain 30(1):63–97
Cameron TA (2005) Individual option prices for climate change mitigation. J Public Econ 89:283–301
Cummings RG, Brookshire DS, Schulze WD (1986) Valuing environmental goods: an assessment of the
contingent valuation method. Rowman and Allanheld, Totowa
Cvetkovich G, Earle TC (1992) Environmental hazards and the public. J Soc Issues 48(4):1–20
Efron B, Tibshirani RJ (1993) An introduction to the bootstrap. Chapman and Hall, New York
Eyers CJ, Norman P, Middel J, Plohr M, Michot S, Atkinson K, Christou RA (2004) AERO2k global
aviation emissions inventories for 2002 and 2025. QinetiQ, Farnborough, UK
Gore A (2006) An inconvenient truth: the planetary emergency of global warming and what we can do about
it. Rodale Books, New York, p 328
Haab TC, McConnell KE (1997) Referendum models and negative willingness to pay: alternative solutions. J
Environ Econ Manage 32:251–270
Hanemann WM, Kanninen B (1999) The statistical analysis of discrete-response CV data. In: Bateman Willis
IJKG (ed) Valuing environmental preferences: theory and practice of the contingent valuation method in
the US, EU, and developing countries. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp 302–441
Hanemann WM, Loomis JB, Kanninen B (1991) Statistical efficiency of double bounded dichotomous
choice contingent valuation. Am J Agric Econ 73:1255–1263
Hersch J, Viscusi WK (2006) The generational divide in support for environmental policies: European
evidence. Clim Change 77:121–136
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (1999) Aviation and the global atmosphere. IPCC, Geneva,
Switzerland
Jones-Lee MW (1989) The economics of safety and physical risk. Blackwell, Oxford
Layton DF, Brown G (2000) Heterogeneous preferences regarding global climate change. Rev Econ Stat
82:616–624
Layton DF, Levine RA (2002) How much does the far future matter? A hierarchical Bayesian analysis of the
public’s willingness to mitigate ecological impacts of climate change. Daniel J. Evans School of Public
Affairs, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, p 29
Li H, Berrens RP, Bohara AK, Jenkins-Smith HC, Silva CL, Weimer DL (2004) Exploring the beta model
using proportional budget information in a contingent valuation study. Ecol Econ 28:329–343
Maddala GS (1983) Limited-dependent and qualitative variables in econometrics. Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge, England
McFadden D (1994) Contingent valuation and social choice. Am J Agric Econ 76:689–708
Mitchell RC, Carson RT (1989) Using surveys to value public goods: the contingent valuation method.
Resources for the Future, Washington DC
Nunes PALD, Schokkaert E (2003) Identifying the warm glow effect in contingent valuation. J Environ Econ
Manage 45:231–245
Oberthur S (2003) Institutional interaction to address greenhouse gas emissions from international transport:
ICAO, IMO and the Kyoto Protocol. Climate Policy 3:191–205
Olsthoorn X (2001) Carbon dioxide emissions from international aviation: 1950–2050. J Air Transp Manag
7:87–93
Pearce D (2003) The social cost of carbon and its policy implications. Oxf Rev Econ Policy 19(3):362–384
Pearce DW, Smale R (2005) Appraising flood control investments in the UK. In: Brouwer R, Pearce DW
(eds) Cost-benefit analysis and water resources management. Edward Elgar, Cheltenham
Schiphol Group (2006) Facts and figures 2005. Schiphol, The Netherlands. www.schipholgroup.com.
Slovic P (1987) Perception of risk. Science 236:280–285
Stern N (2006) The economics of climate change: the stern review. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK
Tol R (1999) The marginal costs of greenhouse gas emissions. Energy J 20(1):61–81
Viscusi WK, Zeckhauser RJ (2006) The perception and valuation of the risks of climate change: a rational
and behavioral blend. Clim Change 77:151–177

